Date: 06.06.2024

pnb one
#JustOneApp

..
.....
. .
',.
7-
/"0
..4.
Amrit Mahotsav

Share Department, Board & Coordination Division, HO Plot No.4 Sector 10, Dwarka,
New Delhi-110075 Tel No. : 011-28044857, E-mail: hosd@pnb.co.in

(Ekta Pasricha)
Company Secretary

Encl.: A/a

Scrip Code : PNB
Scrip Code : 532461

National Stock Exchange of India Limited
BSE Limited
"Exchange Plaza"
Phiroze Jeejeebhoy Towers,
Bandra - Kurla Complex, Bandra (E)
Dalal Street,
Mumbai - 400 051
Mumbai - 400 001

Dear Sir(s),

Reg.: Annual Report of the Bank for the year 2023-24

Pursuant
to
Regulation
34
of the
SEBI
(Listing
Obligations
and
Disclosure
Requirements) Regulations, 2015, please find enclosed the Annual Report of the Bank
for the year 2023-24.

The copy of Annual Report is also available on Bank's website at www.pnbindia.in.

You are requested to take the above on record please.

Thanking you
Yours faithfully,

... the name you can BANK upon!

pnbindia.in
T:011 28075000, 28045000
ianra zinc aa punjb notional bank

aaje arufeu; aaie vi.4, #re- 10, Gr1, a{ fecal--110075
Corp. Office: Plot No. 4, Sector- 10, Dwarka, New Delhi 110075 India
@
6@@@@ma» @wow«sons«as
ia care aa o
pounjb» notional bank
..mrh mrun1
.we name you can BANK upon!

EKTA
PASRICHA

----

**वाϏषέक ϋरपोटर्**

**ANNUAL
REPORT**

**2023-24**

**Tech Innovation: Driving
India’s Financial Inclusion**

**Ϗवकϐसत भारत, समृ˒ भारत  
Developed India, Prosperous India**

ύकसान

मώहला

----

**The Rajbhasha Kirti Puraskar First Prize conferred on Punjab National Bank was received by Shri Atul Kumar Goel,Managing Director & 
Chief Executive Officer from  Shri Ajay Kumar Mishra, Minister of State for Home Affairs, Shri Harivansh Narayan Singh, Deputy 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha and Shri Bhanu Pratap Verma, Union Minister of State for MSME**

Shri Vivek Joshi, secretary, DFS,Shri Pankaj Sharma , Joint secretary, DFS & Director, Punjab National Bank, Shri K.G.Ananthakrishnan, 
Chairman (Non-Executive) and Shri Atul Kumar Goel, MD&CEO Launching PNB Palaash 2.0 under Go Green intiative of the Bank on the 
occasion of 130th Foundation Day at Head office, Dwarka,New Delhi

----

**lef"V vkfFkZd ifj–';**

The year 2024 is a momentous year for Punjab National Bank as it 
enters its 130th year of operations from its commencement on 12th 
April, 1895, from Lahore. The bank has travelled a long way, gaining 
strength and braving strong winds of change, indicating its tenacity 
over the past so many years. Built on the principles of prudence, 
caution, and a forward-looking approach, PNB has come out stronger, 
weathering many crises, and has grown to be the repository of trust 
among its stakeholders and customers.  

Punjab National Bank, in its journey over the last 13 decades, has 
played a highly instrumental role in shaping the banking landscape of 
pre and post-independence India, and continues to play a significant 
role in the country’s economic growth. 

It gives me great pleasure to share with you the progress your Bank 
has made and the general operating environment in FY2023-24.

**Macro-Economic Scenario**

The global economy in FY2023-24 fared better than expected, 
marked by fading fears of recession and a resurgence in growth in 
major economies. Despite economic growth in manufacturing and 
services, global headwinds due to wars persisted. The Russia-Ukraine 
conflict extended and a new Israel-Palestine war partially disrupted 
trade routes. 

Amidst these global trends, the Indian economy remained resilient 
and was the fastest-growing major economy in the world. As per the 
BCG report1, the Indian Economy is at an inflection point today and 
will become a developed nation by 2047. “Today, India is becoming 
the engine of global growth with 15 percent share in global GDP 
growth”2. The economic growth of India exceeded expectations and 
surprised the upside with growth greater than 8.0 per cent in three-
quarters of FY2023-24. It is at a strong 8.2 per cent for the whole year. 
The year ended on a positive note, with high-frequency indicators 
like GST collections, car sales, and UPI transactions hitting high 
spots. India’s Manufacturing PMI climbed to a 16-year high of 59.1 
in March’2024.

**v/;{k dk lans'k**

**Chairman’s Message**

1  	 BCG presentation-Emerging Trends and Implications for PNB dated 6th April 2024
2  	 Excerpts from Prime Minister’s address RBI@90 opening ceremony dated 1st April, 
2024, in Mumbai

----

As per the BCG report, the key drivers that are propelling India’s 
growth story are large domestic consumption demand on the back 
of rising disposable income, global realignment of supply chains; 
government launched Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme 
to boost manufacturing, high export potential turning India into a 
factory of the world, supportive financial ecosystem with rising public 
capex and demographic dividend.  

India’s digital landscape presents exciting prospects. The burgeoning 
e-commerce, fintech, and Artificial Intelligence sectors offer a 
multitude of avenues for qualified professionals. Government 
programs like Digital India are fostering digital inclusion, expanding 
internet access and propelling the digital economy forward. However, 
there is a need for robust cybersecurity measures which ensure the 
integrity of digital processes and provide a shield against evolving 
threats, making it a cornerstone of successful digital transformation.

Climate change poses significant risks to both the global and Indian 
economies. Globally, rising temperatures could reduce GDP by up to 
18% by 2050, according to a report by Swiss Re Institute3. Economies 
around the world will need to take collective action to mitigate climate 
risk. India is at the forefront of mitigating climate change. India 
has shown active participation in global climate change initiatives 
and commitment to renewable energy. India has initiated forums 
for climate action, such as the International Solar Alliance, LeadIT, 
Climate and Disaster Resilience Initiative, Infrastructure for Resilient 
Island States, Green Credit Initiative and International Big Cat Alliance. 
The Reserve bank of India on its part has also framed the Green 
Deposit framework for banks and issued guidelines for disclosure 
of climate related risks by its regulated entities. SEBI has similarly 
issued disclosure guidelines called the Business Responsibility and 
Sustainability Reporting (BRSR) which mandate listed companies to 
make disclosures related to sustainability parameters. India has also 
achieved in 2020-21 the renewable energy target it had set for 2030. 
India aims to achieve net zero emissions by 2070 and fulfil 50 per cent 
of its energy requirements through renewable energy by 2030.

**Banking Scenario**

The last financial year marked a significant milestone for Indian 
banks, representing the best performance in a decade. Across all 
fundamental pillars—business growth, asset quality, profitability and 
capital adequacy —positive growth was evident. Bank credit surged to 
decadal-high levels, reaching 16 per cent (and 20 per cent considering 
the merger impact of HDFC Bank with HDFC Ltd.), primarily driven by 
robust demand for retail loans, as per RBI’s fortnightly data4. Notably, 
gross NPAs decreased from 11.25 per cent in 2018 to below 3 per 
cent by September 2023.

Public Sector Banks played a pivotal role, with cumulative profits 
exceeding Rs. 1.4 Lakh Crore—a remarkable 35 per cent growth over 

**cSafdax ifj–';**

3  	 According to Swiss Re Institute's climate change-Annual Report 2021
4  	 RBI's fortnightly data as on 22nd March 2024

----

the previous year. This transformation owes much to government 
initiatives and reforms. However, decline in market share of business 
remained a challenge for all the Public Sector Banks.

Simultaneously, the Indian banking landscape underwent a structural 
shift. Banks embraced innovation and digitalization, introducing 
various digital products and services. UPI transactions crossed the 
100 billion mark in FY' 2023-24, registering a remarkable 56 per 
cent yearly growth. India now leads globally, accounting for 46 per 
cent of all digital payments. Lending to value chains, too, has made 
significant progress in digitization. This transition towards digital 
banking reflects India’s journey towards a less cash economy. 

The adoption of digital banking capabilities, along with Government 
initiatives like the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY), Unified 
Payment Interface (UPI) and Goods and Service Tax (GST), has brought 
over 50 crore individuals and numerous small businesses into the 
formal banking system. Further initiatives by the Government and 
the regulator like harnessing Goods and Services Tax (GST) invoices 
on IndiaStack, the 59-minute Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise 
(MSME) loan portal, introduction of more players in the financial 
ecosystem such as Account Aggregator and Payment Aggregators, 
digitalization of KCC loans, expanding the scope and coverage of UPI 
and greater interoperability of UPI with other IT applications. Central 
Bank Digital Currency (CBDC), Open Network for Digital Commerce 
(ONDC) etc. will further mature the financial ecosystem. 

Banks will continue to deploy emerging technologies like artificial 
intelligence, machine learning, and the Internet of Things (IoT) to 
improve operational efficiency, mitigate risks, enhance customer 
experience, and develop innovative services. Banks are also 
experimenting with supply chain financing that will enable smoother 
transactions, reduce risks and enhance overall efficiency. 

Apart from extending credit to traditional sectors of the economy like 
MSME and Agriculture, banks are also expected to venture into new 
emerging sectors like Space, Electric Vehicles and Renewable Energy, etc.

Banks in India are gearing up for the next wave of technology-
fuelled innovations in services with the imminent growth of 5G 
internet usage, deeper smartphone penetration, expansion of digital 
payments, frictionless data-led digital lending, risk-mitigated secure 
data protection and collaboration between banks and FinTechs. The 
banking sector will aid the consumption and investment growth 
in the economy by providing credit for the needy sectors of the 
economy. The above steps will pave the way for India to become the 
third-largest economy with a GDP of $5 trillion by 2027. 

**Developments at your Bank**

Beginning its journey from a pure Swadeshi capital of Rs.20,000 on 
12th April 1895, the Bank achieved the landmark of Rs.23 lakh crore 
in Gross Business as of 31st March 2024. In FY’2023-24, your Bank 
registered the highest net profit year-on-year growth at 228 per cent 
to Rs.8,245 crores among all the Public Sector Banks. The Bank has 

**vkids cSad esa fodkl**

----

made significant progress in asset quality in the last two years, and 
now its Net NPA and Provisioning Coverage Ratio are in line with the 
industry. The Bank is also well capitalized with a capital adequacy 
ratio of 15.97 per cent as of March’2024 as against the regulatory 
requirement of 11.5 per cent. 

On the back of strong financial performance and gaining investors’ 
trust, the PNB’s market capitalization crossed Rs.1 lakh crore mark 
on 15th December 2023. Our Bank is the third PSB to achieve this 
feat, and it has also joined the top 50 most valuable listed stocks 
in terms of market capitalization.

Your Bank has always been striving to offer the best. Customer delight 
at all levels and in all transactions is our goal. To achieve this, PNB 
embarked on a Digital Transformation Journey and in the last 2 years 
has launched more than 100 digital products, processes and portals. 
The three pillars on which this digital transformation journey was 
based are –revamping of channels to make them more efficient, 
reduce human intervention and building the best capabilities. 

Keeping customer centricity in mind, Bank offers a range of Current 
Account and Savings Account products to cater to varied financial 
needs of different customer segments. Your Bank has introduced 
various new features and services in its mobile and internet 
banking application to facilitate ease of banking services and also 
strengthened its customer grievance redress mechanism. We are 
constantly collaborating with the Fintech ecosystem to pave the way 
for a more inclusive financial service landscape, with the primary goal 
of enhancing customer service. 

Your Bank is also incorporating Artificial Intelligence, Machine 
Learning in various processes like risk mitigation, model development, 
optimizing cash retention in ATM & BNA5 machines, transaction 
based nudges for boosting retail products, lead generation, customer 
retention, etc. 

Your Bank undertook various measures last year to reinforce 
sharper risk management at the bank like setting up of a climate risk 
management cell, dedicated Market Intelligence Unit, introducing 
new Early Warning System SAJAG 2.0 for effective credit monitoring, 
risk dashboard, strengthening of product approval process etc. 

Your Bank also undertook various steps to strengthen its compliance 
culture like Compliance Monitoring Tool to track and monitor 
individual level compliance, Penalty Reporting and Monitoring 
System to track regulatory penalties and monitoring Compliance Risk 
at Bank level using in-house developed Compliance Risk Assessment 
Model.

India strives to achieve net zero emissions by 2070, and your Bank will 
play a pivotal role in this transition. PNB has launched various schemes 
for green financing like financing of Electric Vehicles, rooftop solar 
panels and extending credit to various renewable energy projects. 

5  	 ATM - Automated Teller Machine, BNA - Bunch Note Acceptor
5- 	 ,Vh,e & v‚VksesVsM Vsyj e'khu] ch,u, & cap uksV ,DlsIVj

----

The Bank last year also launched PNB Palaash, an eight-month period 
campaign to embrace sustainability in bank’s operations through 
measures such as energy and resource conservation, paper reduction, 
waste management and streamlined digital processes.

Going Forward

For accelerating business growth, Your Bank will continue to focus 
on all the segments like Retail, Agriculture, MSME and Corporates. 
For Retail Credit, Bank has multiple products for meeting the credit 
needs of the customers at competitive rates and it is leveraging its 
specialized loan processing points and marketing verticals. Bank will 
undertake tie-ups with Builders, Home Loan Counsellors, Car Dealers 
and NBFCs for driving retail credit growth on continued basis. 

Your Bank will continue its focus on agriculture portfolio to help 
farmers meet their credit requirements. Apart from leveraging its 
dense network of rural branches, Your Bank will continue to market 
its digital products for agriculture i.e. Agri Gold Loan, Krishi Tatkal Rin 
etc. Bank also plans to tie up with State Rural Livelihood Mission for 
financing of Self Help Groups and for financing food and agriculture 
based ancillary activities. 

Improved credit culture due to focused processing centres made the 
Bank well positioned to capitalize an increase in MSME loans with 
the upswing in GDP. 13.5 Lakh vendors are registered on Government 
e-Marketplace (GeM) providing a large opportunity to increase 
MSME portfolio. In India, the number of MSMEs are expected to 
grow from 6.3 Crore to 7.2 Crore in the coming years. Only 15% 
of MSMEs are under the purview of formal credit, providing vast 
untapped potential, that could be exploited by your bank through 
vast network of branches, specialized centres for MSME loans, array 
of schemes and products for MSME segment and digital channels. 
Apart from the existing 58 MSME clusters, the Bank aims to identify 
additional clusters. For each cluster, we plan to introduce customized 
financial products and an awareness program, all facilitated through 
cluster-based financing at competitive interest rates.

For Corporate Credit, Bank has dedicated Extra Large Corporate 
Branches/ Large Corporate Branches and Centralized Industry Oriented 
Credit Desk at Head Office for quick disposal of credit proposals. Your 
Bank will continue to extend credit in Core Industries like Infrastructure 
sectors, Real Estate, Engineering Procurement and Construction, Food 
Processing along with 14 sectors for which government has launched 
the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme.

All these measures are  expected to help the Bank regain its market 
share in overall business.

Bank is ensuring to align its business growth strategy with its risk 
appetite. Your Bank has devised various policies and frameworks for 
management of risk emanating from various sources like economic 
uncertainties, climate risks, regulatory risks, cyber risks etc.

Hkkoh jkg

bu lHkh mik;ksa ls cSad dks lexz dkjksckj esa viuh cktkj fgLlsnkjh iqu% 
gkfly djus esa enn feyus dh vk'kk gSA

----

Your Bank strongly believes in giving back to the society which 
are evident from its various initiatives, CSR activities and training 
programs. Bank has 12 Farmer Training Centres (FTCs) across the 
country that are aiding farmers by providing them training on 
agriculture & allied activities, maintenance of tractor and other farm 
machineries, processing and preservation of fruits and vegetables, 
computer courses, running of beauty parlour, tailoring & embroidery, 
etc. Since inception, FTCs has provided training to more than 18 lakh 
farmers, youth including young girls and women from rural areas. 
Your Bank also provided free financial literacy and credit counselling 
in FY’2023-24 to around 3 lakh people, including different groups like 
Farmers, Self Help Groups, Micro and Small Entrepreneurs, Senior 
Citizens etc. through its 175 Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs). These 
programs aided these groups to have better financial planning that 
helps them inculcate the habit of financial prudence. Bank is also 
providing training to the rural population for skill up-gradation to 
undertake self-employment ventures and jobs and has helped 
around 6 lakh persons to settle through its 76 Rural Self Employment 
Training Institutes (RSETIs) and 2 Rural Development Centres (RDCs) 
since inception. Our RSETIs focus on settlement of participants by 
also ensuring adequate credit for inclusive growth.

Your Bank continues to discharge its social obligations with 
enthusiasm, which includes free medical camps, blood donation 
camps, besides frequent donations and infrastructure support to 
Hospitals, Schools, Defence Stations etc. The Bank also supports 
various societies, charitable institutions and NGOs working for the 
benefit of weaker sections of society. 

Going forward, PNB will play an active role in the vision of Viksit 
Bharat by extending credit support to all sectors of the economy with 
special focus on MSME, Agriculture, Women and Youth. 

Your Bank will continue to deploy generative Artificial Intelligence 
and predictive analytics in its operations for cross-selling and 
upselling opportunities. Your Bank will continue to facilitate ease 
of banking through Mobile First experience, Anywhere Banking, 
Whatsapp Banking, Chatbots, and intuitive mobile apps that will 
help in broadening the financial reach and enhancing the customer 
experience and trust. It is also committed to make the digital 
experience as safe as possible for its various stakeholders by investing 
in appropriate technology to make its systems robust and reliable.

PNB will continue to reassess its processes, user interface and 
banking experience to optimize efficiencies, minimize expenses, 
strengthen customer relationships and enhance regulatory 
compliance and governance to eventually become one of the most 
competitive Banks in the industry.

The Bank believes that human resources are its strongest asset and 
thus continues to focus on upskilling and grooming of its employees 
through its ambitious project UDAAN. Bank in the last financial year 
introduced various tools and initiatives to enhance productivity of its 
employees and effectively utilize its human resources. 

----

¼ds- th- vuar—".ku½ 
xSj&dk;Zikyd vè;{k

The Bank will continue to serve the nation with the same zeal and 
vigour as it has done for the past 13 decades. It will continue to make 
the social fabric of India strong and play a pivotal part in the vision 
of Viksit Bharat making India the third-largest economy by providing 
credit to essential sectors of the economy. The Bank will also continue 
to extend financial services across the length and breadth of the 
country and take steps to ensure financial reach to each and every 
citizen of India. 

I would like to congratulate and extend my gratitude to each and 
every member of the PNB Parivar who has worked relentlessly and 
untiringly for the sustained and steady growth of the Bank. I sincerely 
thank all the stakeholders including esteemed shareholders, 
customers for their continued support and trust in our Bank. I also 
express my sincere thanks to the Government of India, the Reserve 
Bank of India and other regulators for their support and guidance. 
Last but not the least, I thank and appreciate all the Board members 
for their valuable inputs and guidance.

(K.G. Anantha Krishnan)
Non-executive Chairman

----

BLANK PAGE

----

fç; lEekfur fgr/kkjd

oSf'od vFkZO;oLFkk

Hkkjrh; vFkZO;oLFkk

Dear valued stakeholders

On behalf of the Board of Directors and the Management Team, I 
am pleased to share Annual Report of the Bank for FY 2023-24. This 
report shares our unwavering commitment to responsible growth, 
as well as the significant milestones and achievements the Bank has 
accomplished in the previous financial year.

Global Economy

On the global front, the economy remained remarkably resilient, with 
steady growth and a declining inflation. The stable growth in economic 
activities defied warnings of stagflation and global recession. As per 
the World Economic Outlook Report April 2024 of the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), Global growth, estimated at 3.2 per cent in the 
Calendar Year (CY) 2023, is projected to continue at the same pace 
in Calendar Years 2024 and 2025. During CY 2023, global inflation 
descended from its mid-2022 peak as a result of central banks raising 
policy rates around the world.  However, as inflation is converging 
towards target levels, central banks are pivoting towards policy 
easing.

Indian Economy

India’s economy showed strength amid global challenges and 
geopolitical issues driven by strong domestic demand, especially rural 
demand, robust investments, and steady manufacturing growth. Real 
GDP increased by 8.2 per cent in FY 2023-24, with strong investment 
activity. It is higher than the growth of 7.0 per cent in the previous 
year. The buoyant domestic economic landscape is further evidenced 
by improvements in consumer and investor confidence, reflected 
in enhanced sentiment across various sectors. Capital inflows in 
India saw a significant turnaround in FY2023-24 and India’s foreign 
exchange reserves reached an all-time high in March 2024 i.e. $645.6 
billion.

During FY 2023-24, headline CPI inflation averaged at 5.3%, vs. 
the target of 4% (±2%). Despite a declining trajectory of inflation, 
sporadic food price shocks introduced significant volatility. Core 
inflation (which excludes food and fuel) followed a downward path, 
reaching 3.5% in March 2024. In light of this diminishing trajectory, 

**çca/k funs'kd ,oa eq[; dk;Zikyd  
vf/kdkjh ds MsLd ls**

**From the Managing Director
and CEO's Desk**

----

**cSafdax m|ksx**

**vkids cSad dh xfrfof/k;ka**

**dkjksckj esa fodkl dh xfr dks cuk, j[kuk**

**ykHk esa fujarjrk vkSj vuqikr esa lq/kkj**

the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) maintained an unchanged 
policy repo rate of 6.50% throughout FY 2023-24, aiming to strike a 
balance between economic growth and inflation control.

**Banking Industry**

FY 2023-24 has been an exceptionally good year for the entire 
banking industry particularly in terms of Business growth, Asset 
Quality, Profitability and Capital Adequacy. Public sector banks in 
India have posted a stellar performance, with profits crossing Rs.1.4 
trillion for FY 2023-24 vis-à-vis Rs.1.1 trillion in FY 2022-23. PSBs’ 
market performance was reflected in soaring Market Capitalisation 
and stock return also improved during the year.

The asset quality of Public Sector Banks (PSBs) exhibited positive 
trends during FY 2023-24. Both gross non-performing assets (GNPA) 
and net non-performing assets (NNPA) declined to their lowest 
levels in a decade. Additionally, the Capital to Risk-Weighted Assets 
Ratio (CRAR) remained comfortably above the regulatory limit. This 
achievement can be attributed to the concerted efforts focused on 
enhancing asset quality, embracing digitalization and implementing 
strategic reforms at various levels.

**Developments in your Bank**

Throughout the year, the Bank continued to support the economic 
revival by way of extending credit to all the sectors while ensuring 
regulatory compliances and adhering to corporate governance 
norms.

Now I would like to place your Bank’s financial and operational 
performance during FY 2023-24.

**Sustaining the growth momentum in Business**

As on 31st March 2024, the Bank’s Global Business grew to  
Rs. 23,53,038 Crore with Gross Global Advances at Rs.9,83,325 Crore 
and Global Deposit at Rs.13,69,713 Crore. The Bank has continued to 
focus on CASA deposits with current Deposit at Rs.72,201 Crore and 
Saving Deposits at Rs.4,80,298 Crore as on 31st March, 2024. Overall 
CASA Deposits as on 31st March, 2024 stood at Rs.5,52,499 Crore as 
against Rs. 5,38,015 Crore as on 31st March, 2023. CASA Share was at 
41.44 per cent as on 31st March, 2024.

**Consistency in Profit and improving ratios**

FY 2023-24 saw a consistent rise in profitability parameters. Bank’s 
Operating Profit was at Rs. 24,931 Crore in FY 2023-24 vis-à-vis  
Rs. 22,529 Crore in FY 2022-23 registering the growth of 10.7 per cent 
with the help of strong growth of 16.2 per cent year on year basis in 
Net Interest Income. Net Profit grew by more than 225 per cent to 
Rs.8245 Crore in FY 2023-24 on account of improving asset quality.

During FY 2023-24, Return on Assets and Return on Equity improved 
to 0.54 per cent (0.18 per cent in FY 2022-23) and 11.66 per cent (3.94 
per cent in FY 2022-23) respectively. The key productivity parameters, 
Business per employee and Business per branch increased to Rs.2384 
Lakh and Rs. 22,525 Lakh respectively as on 31st March 2024 from  

----

**vkfLr xq.koÙkk esa lq/kkj&igys ls csgrj çn'kZu**

Rs. 2164 Lakh and Rs. 20, 953 Lakh respectively as on 31st March 
2023. The domestic and global Net Interest Margin (NIM) was robust 
at 3.23 per cent and 3.09 per cent respectively in FY 2023-24.

**Focus on RAM**

The Bank continued to give due importance to high yielding Retail, 
Agriculture and MSME (RAM) segment to improve its lending growth 
and diversify its portfolio. RAM Advances as on 31st March, 2024 
stood at Rs. 5,20,050 Crore showing year on year growth of 10.7 per 
cent with RAM share to Domestic Advances at 55.2 per cent.

Under RAM, Retail Segment showed a growth of 12.6 per cent and 
stood at Rs.2,22,574 Crore as on 31st March 2024.

Agriculture segment also showed a growth of 11.3 per cent 
and stood at Rs.1,58,188 Crore while MSME segment showed 
the growth of 7.0 per cent and was Rs.1,39,288 Crore as on 31st 
March 2024. During FY 2023-24, MSME customers who graduated 
beyond MSME and were reclassified as mid corporate customers. 
Accordingly, if the impact of reclassification is taken into account in 
the base figures as on 31st March, 2023, then MSME growth would 
be 12.0% year on year basis.

**Asset Quality Improvement-Performing better than before**

The Bank maintained its focus on enhancing asset quality and these 
efforts were reflected by way of reduction in Gross and Net NPA 
numbers sequentially. Gross NPA reduced to Rs. 56,343 Crore as on 
31st March, 2024 from the level of Rs.77,328 Crore as on 31st March, 
2023 showing a decline of 16.4 per cent on YoY. Net NPA declined to 
Rs 6,799 Crore as on 31st March, 2024 from the level of Rs. 22,585 
Crore as on 31st March, 2023 registering a year on year decline of 
69.9 per cent.

Gross NPA ratio improved by 301 bps to 5.73 per cent, Net NPA ratio 
came below 1 per cent as on 31st March 2024 and was at 0.73 per 
cent hence showing a reduction by 199 bps over 31st March 2023. 
Provision Coverage Ratio (PCR) (incl. TWO) moved upto 95.4 per 
cent as on 31st March 2024 from 86.9 per cent as on 31st March 2023 
showing an improvement of 850 bps.

The Bank’s position in Asset Quality improved mainly on the back of 
the improved recovery and arresting slippages. Your Bank’s recovery 
was 1.4 times of slippages in FY 2022-23 which increased to 2.7 times 
in FY 2023-24. The factors which contributed in improving asset 
quality included dedicated tele-calling campaigns and field visits to 
NPA borrowers. At corporate level also, there was full support and 
involvement for enhancing recovery and arresting slippages. During 
the year, the Bank leveraged portals like PNB- SAMARTH for aiding 
recovery process and re-vamped digital OTS (e-OTS) offering for NPA 
recovery for eligible accounts upto Rs.10 Lakh.

----

**Sound Capital**

The Bank has been laying adequate focus on ensuring adequate 
capital to meet the sustainable growth. The Capital Adequacy Ratio 
reached at 15.97 per cent as on 31st March 2024 as against 15.50 per 
cent in as on 31st March 2023. Tier 1 ratio was at 13.17 per cent and 
Tier 2 was at 2.80 per cent as on 31st March 2024. During FY 2023-24, 
the Bank raised Rs. 6012 Crore through Additional Tier I (AT I) Bonds 
and Rs.3090 Crore through Tier II Bonds.

The Bank also emphasised on optimising Risk weighted Assets by 
focusing on high rated borrowers.

Further, your Bank has taken approval from Board and Shareholders 
for raising of equity capital for an amount aggregating up to Rs.7500 
Crore in one or more tranches during FY 2024-25, through Qualified 
Institutions Placement (QIP)/Follow on Public Offer (FPO) or any 
other permitted mode or a combination thereof. Further, Board has 
accorded permission for raising Capital through Bonds up to Rs.10000 
Crore (Additional Tier-I up to Rs.7000 Crore and Tier-II bonds up to 
Rs.3000 Crore) during FY2024-25.

**Dividend**

Throughout FY 2023-24, the Bank performed remarkably well 
and consolidated its position in the industry. Further, the Board of 
Directors of the Bank have recommended a dividend of Rs.1.50/- per 
equity share (i.e. 75%) of face value of Rs.2/- each to the Shareholders 
for the year 2023-24, subject to the approval of the Shareholders at 
the AGM. This is as compared to the dividend of Rs. 0.65/- per equity 
share distributed for FY 2022-23 and is testimony to our commitment 
to value creation for our esteemed shareholders.

**Customer Service**

Your Bank believes that in the era of intense competition, the quality 
of customer service serves as a significant differentiator, especially in 
a service industry. In this direction, your Bank has launched several 
end to end digital products and process like tab-based account 
opening of Current and Saving (CASA) accounts, digitalised home 
loan and education loan to meet customer expectations and thus 
providing ease of banking.

In addition to it, the Bank also ensured to make adequate efforts 
in the direction by way of resolving customer queries promptly 
and conveniently. Recognizing the critical role of efficient grievance 
redressal bank has undertaken call centre revamp, streamlined 
communication channels and digitalised complaint resolution 
mechanism. There has been 20 per cent reduction in number of 
digital complaints and 22 per cent reduction in number of non-digital 
complaints received in FY 2023-24 over FY 2022-23.

**Digital Footprints**

Technology has revolutionised the way banking is done and has 

**lq–<+ iwath**

**ykHkka'k**

**xzkgd lsok**

----

ensured more convenient, accessible and secure financial services. 
In line with the trend and requirement of the present time, the Bank 
has also taken various steps in this direction and come out with digital 
products and services for the superior customer experience.

Your Bank has launched multiple products, processes and portals 
for providing best in class services to its customers. Some of these 
products and services include Pre-Approved Business Loans (PABL), 
Digital Kisan Credit Cards through Jan Samarth Portal, Digi Home 
Loans, Digital Personal Loan to New To Bank (NTB) Customers (PNB-
Swagat), e-PM SVANidhi, e-GST Express, e-BG. These products, 
processes and portals have not only provided opportunities for 
Business growth but also paced up recovery efforts, customer 
service, credit monitoring, etc. The Bank has acclaimed to have many 
Industry-first offerings which is the matter of pride for your Bank. The 
digital efforts of the Bank has been discussed in detail in the Annual 
Report of the Bank.

Your Bank’s mobile app PNB ONE was upgraded to provide more 
convenience to all its customers. Towards it, the Bank has also 
introduced additional features such as scanner, zoom in and zoom 
out facility, flashlight and scan from gallery. In addition to it, RuPay 
Credit Card can be linked to PNB ONE for Person 2 Merchant (P2M) 
payments. Further, Fixed Deposit/Recurring Deposits opening 
journeys have been made simple. Also, on PNB ONE, customers can 
get a unified view of all the banks accounts. Owing to these efforts 
made, Mobile banking transaction volume increased to 5.40 Crore in 
FY 2023-24 from 2.82 Crore in FY 2022-23.

**Transforming HR via PNB UDAAN**

In a significant move towards revolutionizing the most valuable 
assets i.e., human resources, your Bank has embarked on an 
ambitious journey with Project UDAAN. This initiative is designed to 
create a cutting-edge HR ecosystem, fostering data-driven decisions 
and promoting a culture of inclusivity and equal opportunity. 
By leveraging the latest digital tools, Project UDAAN is all set to 
enhance transparency and efficiency in HR processes. A key focus 
of this initiative is nurturing future leaders through tailored learning 
programs and utilizing advanced analytics to meet performance 
needs.

The comprehensive three-year plan under Project UDAAN has already 
demonstrated success in its first year, with capabilities matching 
industry best practices. As the Bank progresses into the second year, 
the aim of the Bank is to surpass expectations by implementing 
innovative systems and processes. By the end of the third year, your 
Bank aspires to launch state-of-the-art digital platforms, including 
mobile applications and advanced analytics use cases.

A multitude of digital tools and initiatives have been developed and 
launched in the first year of Project UDAAN, focusing on performance 
management and capability building. These include the Role Clarity 
Tool, Target Setting and Collation Tool, PMS Profiler, and Performance 
Dashboards, all of which are designed to enhance role clarity and 

**ih,uch mM+ku ds ek/;e ls ekuo lalk/ku dk :ikarj.k**

----

objective performance evaluations. Additionally, tools for manpower 
assessment, recruitment, and promotions have been introduced 
to strengthen the transformation process. The Postings Tool and 
revamped job family allocation framework ensure scientific and 
transparent placements, fostering a performance-driven culture.

Project UDAAN’s comprehensive approach extends to leadership 
development and change management, with extensive programs and 
initiatives designed to drive awareness, engagement, and adoption 
of new methodologies. The Leadership Development Program has 
successfully trained over 900 mid-managers and senior leaders, 
equipping them with best-in-class skills. Looking ahead, UDAAN 2.0 
aims to introduce a revamped Rewards and Recognition framework, 
an Employee Skill Assessment platform, and a modernized Learning & 
Development ecosystem. By developing a rich library of HR analytics 
use cases, your Bank aims to enhance HR processes and employee 
engagement, ultimately building a world-class talent pool for the 
Bank.

**Awards and Accolades**

The Bank’s performance was adequately recognised at various 
prestigious forums which added to the spirits of your Bank. Notable 
among them is Bank’s 3rd Rank under EASE 5.0. The Bank also stood 
2nd under 2 themes of EASE i.e., Digital Enabled Customer Offerings 
and Big Data & Analytics. Your Bank was also adjudged Best MSME 
Bank by ASSOCHAM. Your Bank was recognised for “Best Data 
Quality in Commercial Bureau Segment” for 2023-24 during the 
Annual Conference of General Managers of PSBs organized by IBA 
& TransUnion (TU) CIBIL and Data Excellence Award in Consumer 
Bureau segment by CRIF Highmark during CRIF InFocus Seminar.

The Bank’s list of awards and accolades also included Excellence in 
Gender Inclusion Award by jury of International Inclusion Alliance. 
With your constant support, the Bank would continue to add to list of 
laurels and accolades in future also.

**Looking Ahead**

Financial Year 2024-25 looks promising as Indian Economy is likely 
to maintain growth momentum. The government focus will continue 
to promote sustained, equitable and inclusive growth by focusing 
on Digitalisation & Ease of Doing Business, Infrastructure including 
Renewable Energy and Financial Inclusion, etc. Economic activities 
are showing resilience with inflation pivoting towards target.  The 
downside risk to this is the geopolitical situation which will continue 
to play a major role in determining the actual growth path of Financial 
Year 2024-25. Coming to Banking sector outlook, banking industry is 
in better position with healthy credit growth outlook, sound capital 
adequacy and enhanced asset quality.

Going forward, your Bank will continue to work on key priorities, 
strategic goals, and the exciting opportunities that lie ahead. Your 

**iqjLdkj vkSj ç'kalk**

**Hkkoh ;kstuk,a**

----

Bank will continue to emphasize on digitalization for delivering 
superior customer experience and operational efficiency. Your Bank 
will also ensure expanding financial inclusion initiatives, reaching 
unbanked and underbanked segments of the population.

In FY 2024-25, the Bank is all set to achieve sustainable growth 
through further digitisation, improved employee-centricity, focus 
on RAM and CASA portfolio build-up, and improving market 
share while reiterating your Bank’s commitment to robust risk 
management practices to ensure financial stability and mitigation 
of potential risks.

Customer Centricity will evolve further and the Bank’s unwavering 
focus will be on providing exceptional customer service and building 
strong customer relationships. With talented team, innovative 
strategies, and unwavering commitment to our core values, we are 
well-positioned to navigate the evolving financial landscape and 
emerge stronger than ever.

I would like to express my gratitude to all members of the Board for 
their trust, faith and active association. I also thank the Ministry of 
Finance and Reserve Bank of India for their support and guidance. 
I also take this opportunity to wholeheartedly thank all our 
stakeholders for their unequivocal trust in the Bank. I would also 
like to acknowledge the continuous patronage we have received in 
this journey from our customers. I thank all our employees for their 
unstinted support during the year.

Yours Sincerely,

(Atul Kumar Goel)
Managing Director & CEO

**vkidk]**

**¼vrqy dqekj xks;y½
çca/k funs'kd ,oa eq[; dk;Zikyd vf/kdkjh**

----

**Ɉी के.जी. अनंतकृ̓न**

गैर - कायर्पालक अ˙क्ष 

**Shri K G Ananthakrishnan**

Non-Executive Chairman

**Ɉी अतुल कुमार गोयल**

**Shri Atul Kumar Goel**

Managing Director & Chief Executive Ofﬁcer

**ϝनदेशक मंडल/Board of Directors**

**Ɉी क̬ाण कुमार**

कायर्पालक ϝनदेशक

**Shri Kalyan Kumar**

Executive Director

**Shri Binod Kumar**

Executive Director

**Ɉी एम.परमϟशवम**

कायर्पालक ϝनदेशक

**Shri M. Paramasivam**

Executive Director

**Ɉी Ϝबभु Ɂसाद महापाȼ**

कायर्पालक ϝनदेशक

**Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra**

Executive Director

**कायर्पालक ϝनदेशक/Executive Directors**

**Ɉी पंकज शमार्**

**Shri Pankaj Sharma**

Govt. of India Nominee Director

**Ɉीमती उमा शंकर**

**Smt Uma Sankar**

Reserve Bank of India Nominee Director

**Ɉी पंकज जोशी**

अंशकाϟलक गैर - सरकारी ϝनदेशक 

**Shri Pankaj Joshi**

Part Time Non-Ofﬁcial Director

**Ɉी संजीव कुमार ϟसǲघल**

अंशकाϟलक गैर - सरकारी ϝनदेशक

**Shri Sanjeev Kumar Singhal**

Part Time Non-Ofﬁcial Director

**डॉ. रेखा जैन**

शेयरधारक- ϝनदेशक

**Dr Rekha Jain**

Shareholder Director

**Ɉी जϘतˢर ϟसǲह बजाज**

शेयरधारक-ϝनदेशक

**Shri Jatinder Singh Bajaj**

Shareholder Director

**ϝनदेशक/Directors**

----

**Ɉी Ϙबनय कुमार गुˮा
Shri Binay Kumar Gupta**

**मुʈ महाɁबंधक (ओवरसीज)/Chief General Manager (Overseas)**

**Ɉी ϗफरोज हसनैन
Shri Firoz Hasnain**

**Ɉी समीर बाजपेयी
Shri Sameer Bajpai**

**अंचल Ɂबंधक (मुʈ महाɁबंधक)/Zonal Managers (Chief General Managers)**

**Ɉी अमरेश Ɂसाद
Shri Amresh Prasad**

**Ɉी सुनील अȯवाल
Shri Sunil Agrawal**

**Ɉी संजय गुˮा
Shri Sanjay Gupta**

**Ɉी एस के राणा
Shri S K Rana**

**Ɉी सुनील कुमार चुघ
Shri Sunil Kumar Chugh**

**Ɉी राजीवा
Shri Rajeeva**

**Ɉी राकेश गांधी
Shri Rakesh Gandhi**

**Ɉी संजीवन नीखर
Shri Sanjeevan Nikhar**

**Ɉी राकेश ȯोवर
Shri Rakesh Grover**

**Ɉी संजय वा̓ǻय
Shri Sanjay Varshneya**

**Ɉी हेमंत वमार्
Shri Hemant Verma**

**Ɉी अϞमत कुमार Ɉीवा͎व
Shri Amit Kumar Srivastava**

**Ɉी वी सुंदरेसन
Shri V Sundaresan**

**Ɉी सुनील कुमार गोयल
Shri Sunil Kumar Goyal**

**Ɉी ϖदलीप कुमार जैन
Shri Dilip Kumar Jain**

----

BLANK PAGE

----

**Contents**

Page No.
Notice 
1-40 

Directors’ Report 
41-84 

Management Discussion and Analysis 
85-127 

Auditors’ Certificate on Corporate Governance 
128-129

Report on Corporate Governance 
130-189

Secretarial Audit Report 
190-195

Certificate of Non-Disqualification of Directors 
196-198

Business Responsibility and Sustainability Report 
199-266

Corporate Social Responsibility Report 
267-287

Disclosure under Basel III Framework 
288

Standalone Financial Statements	
289

- 
Auditors’ Report 
290-302

- 
Balance Sheet 
303-304

- 
Profit & Loss Account 
305-307

- 
Schedules 
308-320

- 
Significant Accounting Policies 
321-335

- 
Notes to Accounts 
336-415

- 
Cash Flow Statement 
416-420

Consolidated Financial Statements	
421

- 
Auditors’ Report 
422-434

- 
Balance Sheet 
435-436

- 
Profit & Loss Account 
437-439

- 
Schedules 
440-452

- 
Significant Accounting Policies 
453-468

- 
Notes to Accounts 
469-487

- 
Cash Flow Statement 
488-491

AUDITORS

D K Chhajer & Co.

S C Bapna & Associates

Ummed Jain & Co.

N K Bhargava & Co.

PSD & Associates

SHARE TRANSFER AGENT
Beetal Financial & Computer Services (P) Limited
‘Beetal House’, 3rd Floor
99, Madangir, Behind Local Shopping Centre
New Delhi 110062
Tel. No. 011-29961281/82/83, Fax: 011-29961284
e-mail: beetalrta@gmail.com

----

BLANK PAGE

----

**Head Office: Plot No.4, Sector 10, Dwarka, New Delhi – 110075
Head Office: Plot No.4, Sector 10, Dwarka, New Delhi – 110075
Head Office: Plot No.4, Sector 10, Dwarka, New Delhi – 110075
Head Office: Plot No.4, Sector 10, Dwarka, New Delhi – 110075
Head Office: Plot No.4, Sector 10, Dwarka, New Delhi – 110075
Head Office: Plot No.4, Sector 10, Dwarka, New Delhi – 110075
Head Office: Plot No.4, Sector 10, Dwarka, New Delhi – 110075**

23oha okf"kZd vke cSBd dh lwpuk 
Notice of the 23rd Annual General Meeting

Date and time of 23rd Annual Generalal
Meeting (AGM)

Saturday, 29th June, 2024 at 11.00
11.00 a.m.
a.m.

through VC/OAVM
VC/OAVM

Cut-off
date
for
de
determining
termining
the
the

shareholders eligible
eligible to vote on the
the

Agenda Items of
of
of the
the AGM

Saturday,
Saturday, 22nd June,
June, 2024

Record Date for Dividend
Dividend
Dividend
Saturday, 22nd June,
June,
June, 2024
2024

Book Closure Dates
Dates
From
FromSunda
Sunday,23rdJune,
June,
June,2024toSaturday,
turday,

29th June, 2024 (both
(both days
days inclusive)
inclusive)

Period of Remote E-Voting
E-Voting
From
09.00
a.m.
of
Wednesday,
ednesday,

26
26th June, 2024
2024 to 05.00
05.00 p.m.
p.m. of Friday,y,

28th
th June,
June, 2024
2024

Dividend Payment Date
Date
Friday,
Friday,
Friday, 12th
th July,
July, 2024
2024

**23oha okf"kZd vke cSBd ¼,th,e½ dh frfFk 
,oa le;**

**ohfM;ks d‚UÝsaflax ohlh@vks,oh,e ds 
ekè;e ls 'kfuokj] 29 twu] 2024 dks iwokZà 
11-00 cts**

**'kfuokj] 22 twu] 2024**

**ykHkka'k ds fy, fjd‚MZ frfFk 
'kfuokj] 22 twu] 2024**

**cgh can djus dh frfFk;k¡ 
jfookj] 23 twu] 2024 ls 'kfuokj] 29 twu] 
2024 rd ¼nksuksa fnu 'kkfey½**

**egRoiw.kZ frfFk;k¡ 
egRoiw.kZ frfFk;k¡**

**IMPORTANT DATES
IMPORTANT DATES
IMPORTANT DATES**

----

 Head Office: Plot No.4, Sector 10, Dwarka, New Delhi – 110075 

(E-mail id: hosd@pnb.co.in)                            

**NOTICE**

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the 23rd Annual General Meeting of 
the Shareholders of Punjab National Bank will be held on Saturday, 
29th June, 2024 at 11.00 A.M. (IST) through Video Conferencing 
(VC)/Other Audio-Visual Means (OAVM) to transact the following 
business:

**ORDINARY BUSINESS**

Item No.1: To discuss, approve and adopt the Audited Balance Sheet 
of the Bank as at 31st March 2024, Profit and Loss Account of the 
Bank for the year ended 31st March 2024, the Report of the Board 
of Directors on the working and activities of the Bank for the period 
covered by the Accounts and the Auditor’s Report on the Balance 
Sheet and Accounts.

To consider and if thought fit, to pass the following as Ordinary 
Resolution:

“RESOLVED THAT the Audited Balance Sheet of the Bank as at 31st 
March 2024, Profit and Loss Account of the Bank for the year ended 
31st March 2024, the Report of the Board of Directors on the working 
and activities of the Bank for the period covered by the Accounts and 
the Auditors’ Report on the Balance Sheet and Accounts be and are 
hereby approved and adopted.”

**Item No.2: To declare dividend on the equity shares of the Bank for 
the financial year 2023-24**

To consider and if thought fit, to pass the following as Ordinary 
Resolution:

**“RESOLVED THAT Dividend at the rate of ₹1.50 per equity share of 
the face value of ₹2/- each of the Bank for the financial year ended 
31st March, 2024, be and is hereby declared.”**

**SPECIAL BUSINESS**

Item No. 3: To consider and approve the Material Related Party 
Transactions for Outright securities transactions (sale/purchase of 
securities), Money Market transactions, Primary subscription of 
securities, Security Arranger services in PNBs NCD issuances through 
EBP in which PNB Gilts may be arranger/one of the arrangers to the 
issue and also such other transactions such as purchase/sale of 
Government Securities (G-Sec), Bonds/ Debentures of PSUs, other 
bodies as may be disclosed in the notes forming part of the Financial 
Statements for the relevant Financial Year with PNB Gilts Limited 
(Subsidiary), PNB Housing Finance Ltd. (Associate) and PNB Metlife 
India Insurance Co. Ltd. (Associate) 

**fo'ks"k dk;Z**

----

To consider and if thought fit, to pass the following as Ordinary 
Resolution:

“RESOLVED THAT pursuant to the provisions of Regulation 23(4) of 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and 
Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 (hereinafter referred to 
as “SEBI Listing Regulations”) and such other applicable provisions 
of law, if any, and any amendments, modifications, variations or re-
enactments thereof (hereinafter referred to as “Applicable Laws”) 
and the ‘Policy on Related Party Transactions’ of Punjab National 
Bank (hereinafter referred to as “Bank”), the Shareholders of the 
Bank do hereby accord approval to the Board of Directors of the 
Bank (hereinafter referred to as “Board”, which term shall be deemed 
to include the Audit Committee of Board or any Committee duly 
constituted by the Board, to exercise its powers conferred under this 
resolution), for entering into and/or carrying out and/or continuing 
with contracts or arrangements or transactions (whether individual 
transaction or transactions taken together or a series of transactions 
or otherwise) for Outright securities transactions (sale/purchase 
of securities), Money Market transactions, Primary subscription of 
securities, Security Arranger services in PNBs NCD issuances through 
EBP in which PNB Gilts may be arranger/one of the arrangers to 
the issue and also such other transactions such as purchase/sale of 
Government Securities (G-Sec), Bonds/ Debentures of PSUs, other 
bodies as may be disclosed in the notes forming part of the Financial 
Statements for the relevant Financial Year, for an amount in excess 
of the materiality threshold of ₹1000 Crore or 10% of the Annual 
Consolidated Turnover of the Bank as per the last audited financial 
statements of the Bank, whichever is lower, as prescribed under 
Applicable Laws, from the date of AGM for FY 2023-24 (i.e., 29th 
June, 2024) till the date of next AGM, as specified in the Explanatory 
Statement annexed to the Notice.”

“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Board be and is hereby authorised 
to sign and execute all necessary documents, contracts, deeds, 
agreements and to do all such acts, deeds, matters and things as it 
may in its absolute discretion deem necessary or expedient to give 
effect to this resolution and to settle any question that may arise in 
this regard and incidental thereto, without being required to seek any 
further consent or approval of the shareholders to the end and intent 
that the shareholders shall be deemed to have given their approval 
thereto expressly by the authority of this resolution.” 

“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Board be and is hereby authorised 
to delegate all or any of the powers herein conferred on it, to the 
Managing Director & CEO or Executive Director(s) or Committee of 
Executives or any Officer(s) of the Bank, as it may deem fit, to give 
effect to the aforesaid Resolution.”

**Item No.4: To consider and approve the Material Related Party 
Transactions for Loans and Advances with PNB Gilts Ltd. (Subsidiary) 
and PNB Housing Finance Ltd. (Associate)**

To consider and if thought fit, to pass the following as Ordinary 
Resolution:

“RESOLVED THAT pursuant to the provisions of Regulation 23(4) of 

----

the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and 
Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 (hereinafter referred to 
as “SEBI Listing Regulations”) and such other applicable provisions 
of law, if any, and any amendments, modifications, variations or re-
enactments thereof (hereinafter referred to as “Applicable Laws”) 
and the ‘Policy on Related Party Transactions’ of Punjab National 
Bank (hereinafter referred to as “Bank”), the Shareholders of the 
Bank do hereby accord approval to the Board of Directors of the 
Bank (hereinafter referred to as “Board”, which term shall be deemed 
to include the Audit Committee of Board or any Committee duly 
constituted by the Board, to exercise its powers conferred under this 
resolution), for entering into and/or carrying out and/or continuing 
with contracts or arrangements or transactions (whether individual 
transaction or transactions taken together or a series of transactions 
or otherwise) of granting of Loans and Advances such as Term Loans, 
Line of Credit, Overdraft, etc., to PNB Gilts Limited and PNB Housing 
Finance Limited (PNBHFL), Related Parties of the Bank within the 
meaning of Regulation 2(1)(zb) of SEBI Listing Regulations, for an 
amount in excess of the materiality threshold of ₹1000 Crore or 
10% of the Annual Consolidated Turnover  of the Bank as per the 
last audited financial statements of the Bank, whichever is lower, as 
prescribed under Applicable Laws, from the date of AGM for FY 2023-
24 (i.e., 29th June, 2024) till the date of next AGM, as specified in the 
Explanatory Statement annexed to the Notice.”

“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Board be and is hereby authorised 
to sign and execute all necessary documents, contracts, deeds, 
agreements and to do all such acts, deeds, matters and things as it 
may in its absolute discretion deem necessary or expedient to give 
effect to this resolution and to settle any question that may arise in 
this regard and incidental thereto, without being required to seek any 
further consent or approval of the shareholders to the end and intent 
that the shareholders shall be deemed to have given their approval 
thereto expressly by the authority of this resolution.” 

“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Board be and is hereby authorised 
to delegate all or any of the powers herein conferred on it, to the 
Managing Director & CEO or Executive Director(s) or Committee of 
Executives or any Officer(s) of the Bank, as it may deem fit, to give 
effect to the aforesaid Resolution.”

**Item No.5: To consider and approve the Material Related Party 
Transactions for IBPC Transactions with Regional Rural Banks 
(Associates)**

To consider and if thought fit, pass the following as Ordinary 
Resolution:

“RESOLVED THAT pursuant to the provisions of Regulation 23(4) of 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and 
Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 (hereinafter referred to 
as “SEBI Listing Regulations”) and such other applicable provisions 
of law, if any, and any amendments, modifications, variations or re-
enactments thereof (hereinafter referred to as “Applicable Laws”) 
and the ‘Policy on Related Party Transactions’ of Punjab National 
Bank (hereinafter referred to as “Bank”), the Shareholders of the 
Bank do hereby accord approval to the Board of Directors of the 
Bank (hereinafter referred to as “Board”, which term shall be deemed 

----

to include the Audit Committee of Board or any Committee duly 
constituted by the Board, to exercise its powers conferred under this 
resolution), for entering into and/or carrying out and/or continuing 
with contracts or arrangements or transactions (whether individual 
transaction or transactions taken together or a series of transactions 
or otherwise) for undertaking IBPC transactions with Regional Rural 
Banks viz. Assam Gramin Vikash Bank, Bangiya Gramin Vikash Bank, 
Himachal Pradesh Gramin Bank, Manipur Rural Bank, Punjab Gramin 
Bank, Prathama UP Gramin Bank, Tripura Gramin Bank, Dakshin Bihar 
Gramin Bank and Sarva Haryana Gramin Bank, Related Parties of 
the Bank within the meaning of Regulation 2(1)(zb) of SEBI Listing 
Regulations, for an amount in excess of the materiality threshold of 
₹1000 Crore or 10% of the Annual Consolidated Turnover of the Bank 
as per the last audited financial statements of the Bank, whichever 
is lower, as prescribed under Applicable Laws, from the date of AGM 
for FY 2023-24 (i.e., 29th June, 2024) till the date of next AGM, as 
specified in the Explanatory Statement annexed to the Notice.”

“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Board be and is hereby authorised 
to sign and execute all necessary documents, contracts, deeds, 
agreements and to do all such acts, deeds, matters and things as it 
may in its absolute discretion deem necessary or expedient to give 
effect to this resolution and to settle any question that may arise in 
this regard and incidental thereto, without being required to seek any 
further consent or approval of the shareholders to the end and intent 
that the shareholders shall be deemed to have given their approval 
thereto expressly by the authority of this resolution.” 

“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Board be and is hereby authorised 
to delegate all or any of the powers herein conferred on it, to the 
Managing Director & CEO or Executive Director(s) or Committee of 
Executives or any Officer(s) of the Bank, as it may deem fit, to give 
effect to the aforesaid Resolution.”

Item No.6: To consider and approve the Material Related Party 
Transactions for Current Account with PNB Gilts Ltd. (Subsidiary) 
and PNB Housing Finance Ltd. (Associate) 

To consider and if thought fit, to pass the following as Ordinary 
Resolution:

“RESOLVED THAT pursuant to the provisions of Regulation 23(4) of 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and 
Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 (hereinafter referred to 
as “SEBI Listing Regulations”) and such other applicable provisions 
of law, if any, and any amendments, modifications, variations or re-
enactments thereof (hereinafter referred to as “Applicable Laws”) 
and the ‘Policy on Related Party Transactions’ of Punjab National 
Bank (hereinafter referred to as “Bank”), the Shareholders of the 
Bank do hereby accord approval to the Board of Directors of the 
Bank (hereinafter referred to as “Board”, which term shall be deemed 
to include the Audit Committee of Board or any Committee duly 
constituted by the Board, to exercise its powers conferred under this 
resolution), for entering into and/or carrying out and/or continuing 
with contracts or arrangements or transactions (whether individual 
transaction or transactions taken together or a series of transactions 
or otherwise) for acceptance of current account deposits by the 

----

Bank whether by way of fresh deposit(s) or any extension(s) or 
modification(s) of earlier contracts/arrangements/transactions or 
otherwise, from PNB Gilts Limited and PNB Housing Finance Limited, 
Related Parties of the Bank within the meaning of Regulation 2(1)(zb) 
of SEBI Listing Regulations, for an amount in excess of the materiality 
threshold of ₹1000 Crore or 10% of the Annual Consolidated Turnover  
of the Bank as per the last audited financial statements of the Bank, 
whichever is lower, as prescribed under Applicable Laws, from the 
date of AGM for FY 2023-24 (i.e., 29th June, 2024) till the date of 
next AGM, as specified in the Explanatory Statement annexed to the 
Notice.”

“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Board be and is hereby authorised 
to sign and execute all necessary documents, contracts, deeds, 
agreements and to do all such acts, deeds, matters and things as it 
may in its absolute discretion deem necessary or expedient to give 
effect to this resolution and to settle any question that may arise in 
this regard and incidental thereto, without being required to seek any 
further consent or approval of the shareholders to the end and intent 
that the shareholders shall be deemed to have given their approval 
thereto expressly by the authority of this resolution.” 

“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Board be and is hereby authorised 
to delegate all or any of the powers herein conferred on it, to the 
Managing Director & CEO or Executive Director(s) or Committee of 
Executives or any Officer(s) of the Bank, as it may deem fit, to give 
effect to the aforesaid Resolution.”

Item No.7: To consider and approve the Material Related Party 
Transactions in the Nostro Account with Druk PNB Bank Limited 
(International Subsidiary) & Everest Bank Limited (International 
Joint Venture).

To consider and if thought fit, to pass with or without modification, 
the following as Ordinary Resolution:

“RESOLVED THAT pursuant to the provisions of Regulation 23(4) of 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and 
Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 (hereinafter referred to 
as “SEBI Listing Regulations”) and such other applicable provisions 
of law, if any, and any amendments, modifications, variations or re-
enactments thereof (hereinafter referred to as “Applicable Laws”) 
and the ‘Policy on Related Party Transactions’ of Punjab National 
Bank (hereinafter referred to as “Bank”), the Shareholders of 
the Bank do hereby accord approval to the Board of Directors of 
the Bank (hereinafter referred to as “Board”, which term shall be 
deemed to include the Audit Committee of Board or any Committee 
duly constituted by the Board, to exercise its powers conferred 
under this resolution), for entering into and/or carrying out and/or 
continuing with contracts or arrangements or transactions (whether 
individual transaction or transactions taken together or a series of 
transactions or otherwise) in the Nostro accounts whether by way 
of fresh transaction or any extension(s) or modification(s) of earlier 
contracts/arrangements/ transactions or otherwise, with Druk PNB 
Bank Limited and Everest Bank Limited, Related Parties of the Bank 

----

within the meaning of Regulation 2(1)(zb) of SEBI Listing Regulations, 
for an amount in excess of the materiality threshold of ₹1000 Crore 
or 10% of the Annual Consolidated Turnover  of the Bank as per the 
last audited financial statements of the Bank, whichever is lower, as 
prescribed under Applicable Laws, from the date of AGM for FY 2023-
24 (i.e., 29th June, 2024) till the date of next AGM, as specified in the 
Explanatory Statement annexed to the Notice.”

“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Board be and is hereby authorised 
to sign and execute all necessary documents, contracts, deeds, 
agreements and to do all such acts, deeds, matters and things as it 
may in its absolute discretion deem necessary or expedient to give 
effect to this resolution and to settle any question that may arise in 
this regard and incidental thereto, without being required to seek any 
further consent or approval of the shareholders to the end and intent 
that the shareholders shall be deemed to have given their approval 
thereto expressly by the authority of this resolution.” 

“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the Board be and is hereby authorised 
to delegate all or any of the powers herein conferred on it, to the 
Managing Director & CEO or Executive Director(s) or Committee of 
Executives or any Officer(s) of the Bank, as it may deem fit, to give 
effect to the aforesaid Resolution.”

By order of the Board of Directors

     For Punjab National Bank 

Place: New Delhi 
 
                               (Ekta Pasricha)
Date: 03.06.2024 
                                     Company Secretary

funs'kd eaMy ds vkns'k ls
—rs iatkc uS'kuy cSad 

----

**NOTES:**

**1.	
Annual General Meeting through Video Conferencing (VC)/
Other Audio-Visual Means (OAVM)**

 
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA), has vide Circular dated 
25th September, 2023 read with its preceding Circulars issued 
in April, 2020 & May, 2022 and December, 2022 permitted the 
companies, to conduct their AGMs through VC or OAVM upto 30th 
September 2024 in accordance with the framework provided in 
the MCA Circular(s). SEBI vide its Circular dated 07th October, 2023 
read with SEBI Circular dated 05th January, 2023 and 13th May, 
2022, has further extended the relaxation with respect to sending 
proxy forms to the shareholders in respect of General Meetings till 
30th September, 2024.

In accordance with the aforesaid Guidelines and the provisions of the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 
1970 & the SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) 
Regulations, 2015, the 23rd Annual General Meeting (AGM) of 
the Bank is being conducted through VC/OAVM which does not 
require physical presence of shareholders at a common venue. The 
shareholders attending the AGM through VC/OAVM shall be counted 
for the purpose of reckoning the quorum under Regulation 58 of 
Punjab National Bank (Shares & Meetings) Regulations, 2000. The 
deemed venue for the 23rd AGM shall be the Head Office of the Bank.

The facility for participation in the AGM through VC/OAVM, voting 
through remote e-voting and e-voting during the AGM, will be 
provided by National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL).

Shareholders may join the AGM through VC/OAVM facility which 
shall be kept open for the shareholders on 29th June, 2024 from 
10:30 a.m. i.e., 30 minutes before the time scheduled to start the 
AGM. The Bank/NSDL may close the window for joining the VC/
OAVM facility 30 minutes after the scheduled start time.

Shareholders may please note that the VC/OAVM facility, provided 
by NSDL, allows participation of at least 1,000 shareholders on a 
‘first-come, first-serve’ basis. The shareholders holding 2% or more 
of the share capital of the Bank, Promoter, Institutional Investors, 
Directors, Key Managerial Personnel, the Chairpersons of the 
Audit Committee, Nomination and Remuneration Committee and 
Stakeholders Relationship Committee, Auditors, etc., can attend 
the AGM without any restriction on account of ‘first-come, first-
serve’ basis.

**2.	
The relevant Explanatory Statements setting out material facts 
in respect of Item Nos. 3 to 7 as set out in this Notice is annexed 
hereto.**

**3.	
Appointment of Proxy**

 
A shareholder entitled to attend and vote at the meeting, is 
entitled to appoint a proxy to attend and vote instead of himself/
herself and such a proxy need not be a shareholder of the Bank. 
Pursuant to the aforesaid MCA & SEBI Circulars, as the physical 
attendance of the Shareholders has been dispensed with, there 
is no requirement of appointment of proxies. Accordingly, the 

**fVIif.k;k¡%**

----

**facility of appointment of proxies by shareholders will not 
be available for the AGM and therefore, the instrument for 
appointing proxy and attendance slip are not being attached to 
the Notice.**

**4.	
Appointment of an Authorised Representative:**

 
No person shall be entitled to attend the AGM through VC/OAVM 
and/or vote through e-voting as duly authorized representative 
of a body corporate, unless a certified true copy of the resolution 
appointing him/her as a duly authorized representative, 
shall have been deposited to the Share Department, Punjab 
National Bank, West Wing, Second Floor, Plot No.4, Sector 
10, Dwarka, New Delhi 110075 or is sent to the Scrutinizer by  
e-mail to sachincs2022@gmail.com with a copy marked to 
evoting@nsdl.com and hosd@pnb.co.in, not less than four days 
before the date of the meeting i.e. on or before the closing hours 
i.e. 5.00 p.m. of Monday, 24th June, 2024.

 
No officer or employee of the Bank shall be appointed as 
Authorised Representative of a shareholder.

**5.	
Closure of Register of Shareholders**

 
The Register of Shareholders of the Bank will remain closed from 
Sunday, 23rd June, 2024 till Saturday, 29th June, 2024 (both days 
inclusive) for the purpose of the 23rd Annual General Meeting of 
the Bank and for determining the eligibility of the shareholders 
for payment of Dividend for FY 2023-24.

**6.	
Payment of Dividend:**

 
The Board of Directors has recommended dividend of ₹1.50 per equity 
share of ₹2/- each for the financial year ended 31st March, 2024.

 
The payment of dividend, if declared by the shareholders in the 
23rd Annual General Meeting, will be made to those shareholders 
whose names appear:

a) 
as Beneficial Owners as at the close of business hours on 
Saturday, 22nd June, 2024 as per the record of NSDL/CDSL in 
respect of the shares held in electronic form and / or

b) 
in the Register of shareholders as on Saturday, 22nd June, 2024 
after giving effect to the valid transmission requests received 
from the shareholders holding shares in physical form. 

The Record Date for payment of Dividend will be Saturday, 22nd 

June, 2024.

The dividend payment date will be Friday, 12th July, 2024.

Shareholders are therefore requested to register/update their 
complete bank details:

i) 
with their Depository Participant(s) with which they 
maintain their demat accounts, if shares are held in 
dematerialised mode, by submitting forms and documents 
as may be required by the Depository Participant(s); and 

ii) 
with the Bank/Bank’s STA by sending duly filled KYC form 

**4-	 çkfèk—r çfrfufèk dh fu;qfä%**

**5-	 'ks;jèkkjdksa ds jftLVj dks can djuk**

**6-	 ykHkka'k dk Hkqxrku%**

**ykHkka'k ds Hkqxrku dh fjd‚MZ frfFk 'kfuokj] 22 twu] 2024 gksxhA**

----

- ISR-1, ISR-2, ISR-3/SH-13 along with self-attested copy of 
pan card, photo id address proof, cancelled cheque leaf, if 
shares are held in physical mode.

Payment of dividend shall be made through electronic mode to the 
shareholders who have updated their bank account details. Dividend 
Warrants/Demand Drafts will be dispatched by the Bank through 
its Registrar and Share Transfer Agent (STA) viz. Beetal Financial & 
Computer Services (Pvt.) Ltd., before the date of payment of dividend, 
to the registered address of the shareholders (holding shares in demat 
form) who have not updated their bank account details, in accordance 
with regulatory guidelines.

**Important Information regarding Payment of Dividend in respect of 
physical shares:**

SEBI vide its Master Circular No. SEBI/HO/MIRSD/POD-1/P/
CIR/2024/37 dated 7th May, 2024 has issued inter alia, guidelines 
on ‘Common and Simplified Norms for processing investor's service 
request by RTAs and norms for furnishing PAN, KYC details and 
Nomination’. Para 19.1 of the Master Circular mandates all the 
holders of physical securities to furnish PAN, Choice of Nomination, 
Contact details, Bank A/c details and Specimen signature for their 
corresponding folio numbers. In continuation of the same, Para 
19.2 lays down the procedure for availing services and payment of 
dividend etc., in the folios without PAN, KYC details and nomination 
which reads as under:

“19.2. Folios without PAN, KYC details and Nomination: The security 
holder(s) whose folio(s) do not have PAN, Choice of Nomination, 
Contact Details, Bank Account Details and Specimen Signature updated, 
shall be eligible: 

 •
to lodge grievance or avail any service request from the RTA only 
after furnishing PAN, KYC details and Nomination. 

	•
for any payment including dividend, interest or redemption 
payment in respect of such folios, only through electronic mode 
with effect from April 01, 2024. An intimation shall be sent by 
the Listed Company to the securityholder that such payment is 
due and shall be made electronically only upon complying with 
the requirements stated in para 19.1 of the Master Circular.

**In view of the above, if you are holding shares in physical form, you 
are required to furnish valid PAN, choice of Nomination, Contact 
Details, Mobile Number, Bank Account Details and updated Specimen 
Signature immediately to the Bank’s RTA in the prescribed forms 
(available on the Bank’s website: www.pnbindia.in under the link: 
https://www.pnbindia.in/Important-Announcement-to-Physical-
Shareholders.html), if not already done, to avail uninterrupted service 
requests as well as dividend credit in bank account, as no dividend 
will be paid by way of issuance of physical warrant, with effect from 
01st April, 2024. For your convenience, you may also dematerialise 
the physical holding so as to avail the benefit of electronic dividend 
payment.**

----

**Tax Deductible at Source:**

As per the Income-tax Act, 1961 (the Act), as amended by the Finance 
Act, 2020, dividend paid or distributed by the Bank after April 1, 2020 
shall be taxable in the hands of the Shareholders. The Bank shall 
therefore be required to deduct tax at source (TDS) at the prescribed 
rates, wherever applicable, at the time of making the payment of 
dividend to the shareholders. For details, shareholders may refer to the 
Annexure appended to this Notice.

**7.	
Voting Rights**

In terms of provisions of Section 3(2E) of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (as amended), 
no shareholder of the Bank other than the Central Government shall 
be entitled to exercise voting rights in respect of the shares held by 
him in excess of 10% of the total voting rights of all the shareholders of 
the Bank. If any share stands in the name of two or more persons, the 
person first named in the register shall, as regards voting, be deemed to 
be the sole holder thereof. 

In terms of Rule 20 of the Companies (Management and Administration) 
Rules, 2014, as amended, the shareholders entitled to attend and vote at 
the meeting, can exercise their voting rights through electronic means.

**8.	
Voting through Electronic Means**

I. 
Pursuant to Regulation 44 of the SEBI (Listing Obligations and 
Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 and provisions 
under Rule 20 of the Companies (Management and 
Administration) Rules, 2014, as amended, read with MCA 
Circulars, the Bank is pleased to provide its shareholders 
the facility to exercise their right to vote in respect of the 
business to be transacted at the AGM  by electronic means 
(remote e-voting and e-voting during the AGM) through 
the e-voting platform provided by National Securities 
Depository Limited (NSDL). The cut-off date for determining 
the eligibility of shareholders to cast vote through e-voting 
is Saturday, 22nd June, 2024.

II. 
Those shareholders, who will be present in the AGM 
through VC/OAVM facility and have not cast their vote on 
the resolution(s) through remote e-voting, shall be eligible 
to vote through e-voting system during the AGM. 

III. 
The shareholders who have cast their vote by remote e-voting 
prior to the AGM may also attend the meeting through VC/
OAVM but shall not be entitled to cast their vote again.

IV. 
The instructions for remote e-voting are as under:

a. 
The remote e-voting period begins at 09.00 a.m. 
of Wednesday, 26th June 2024 and ends at 05.00 
p.m. of Friday, 28th June, 2024. During this period, 
shareholders of the Bank holding shares either in 
physical form or in dematerialized form, as on the cut-
off date of Saturday, 22nd June, 2024 may cast their 
vote electronically. Thereafter, the remote e-voting 
module shall be disabled by NSDL.

**lzksr ij dj dVkSrh%**

**7-	 ernku dk vfèkdkj**

**8-	 bysDVª‚fud ekè;eksa ls ernku**

----

b. 
The details of the process and manner for remote 
e-voting are explained herein below:

The way to vote electronically on NSDL e-Voting system consists of “Two 
Steps” which are as follows:

Step 1: Access to NSDL e-Voting system

A)	
Login method for e-Voting and joining the virtual meeting for 
Individual shareholders holding securities in demat mode.

 
In terms of SEBI Circular No. SEBI/HO/CFD/CMD/CIR/P/2020/242 
dated December 9, 2020 on ‘e-Voting facility provided by Listed 
Companies’, Individual shareholders holding securities in demat 
mode are allowed to vote through their demat accounts/website 
of Depositories/Depository Participants. Shareholders are advised 
to update their mobile numbers and email Ids in their demat 
accounts in order to access e-Voting facility.

The login method for individual shareholders holding securities in 
demat mode is given below:

	
	
ch-	 fjeksV Ã&oksÇVx ds fy, çfØ;k ,oa rjhds dk fooj.k ;gka 
uhps fn;k x;k gS%

pj.k 1% ,u,lMh,y Ã&oksÇVx flLVe esa ,Dlsl

----

**Type of shareholders
Login Method**

Individual 
Shareholders holding 
securities in demat 
mode with NSDL.

1. 
Existing IDeAS user can visit the 
e-Services website of NSDL viz. 
https://eservices.nsdl.com either on 
a Personal Computer or on a mobile. 
On the e-Services home page click on 
the “Beneficial Owner” icon under 
“Login” which is available under 
‘IDeAS’ section, this will prompt 
you to enter your existing User 
ID and Password. After successful 
authentication, you will be able to 
see e-Voting services under Value 
added services. Click on “Access to 
e-Voting” under e-Voting services 
and you will be able to see e-Voting 
page. Click on company name 
or e-Voting service provider i.e. 
NSDL and you will be re-directed to 
e-Voting website of NSDL for casting 
your vote during the remote e-Voting 
period or joining virtual meeting & 
voting during the meeting.

3. 
Visit the e-Voting website of NSDL. 
Open web browser by typing the 
following URL: https://www.evoting.
nsdl.com/ either on a Personal 
Computer or on a mobile. Once the 
home page of e-Voting system is 
launched, click on the icon “Login” 
which is available under ‘Shareholder/
Member’ section. A new screen will 
open. You will have to enter your 
User ID (i.e. your sixteen digit demat 
account number held with NSDL), 
Password/OTP and a Verification 
Code as shown on the screen. After 
successful authentication, you will be 
redirected to NSDL Depository site 
wherein you can see e-Voting page. 
Click on company name or e-Voting 
service provider i.e. NSDL and you 
will be redirected to e-Voting website 
of NSDL for casting your vote during 
the remote e-Voting period or joining 
virtual meeting & voting during the 
meeting.

----

**Type of shareholders
Login Method**

4. 
Shareholders/Members 
can 
also 

download NSDL Mobile App “NSDL 
Speede” facility by scanning the QR 
code mentioned below for seamless 
voting experience.

Individual 
Shareholders holding 
securities in demat 
mode with CDSL

1. 
Users who have opted for CDSL Easi 
/ Easiest facility, can login through 
their existing user id and password. 
Option will be made available to 
reach e-Voting page without any 
further authentication. The users to 
login Easi/Easiest are requested to 
visit CDSL website www.cdslindia.
com and click on login icon & New 
System Myeasi Tab and then use 
your existing my easi username & 
password.

2. 
After successful login the Easi/Easiest 
user will be able to see the e-Voting 
option for eligible companies where 
the evoting is in progress as per the 
information provided by company. 
On clicking the evoting option, the 
user will be able to see e-Voting 
page of the e-Voting service provider 
for casting your vote during the 
remote e-Voting period or joining 
virtual meeting & voting during the 
meeting. Additionally, there are also 
links provided to access the system of 
all e-Voting Service Providers, so that 
the user can visit the e-Voting service 
providers’ website directly.

3. 
If the user is not registered for Easi/
Easiest, option to register is available 
at CDSL website www.cdslindia.
com and click on login & New 
System Myeasi Tab and then click on 
registration option.

1-	 ftu mi;ksxdrkZvksa us lhMh,l,y Easi/ 

2-	 lQy y‚fxu ds ckn] Easi/ Easiest 

----

**Type of shareholders
Login Method**

4. 
Alternatively, the user can directly 
access e-Voting page by providing 
Demat Account Number and PAN 
No. from a e-Voting link available 
on www.cdslindia.com home page. 
The system will authenticate the 
user by sending OTP on registered 
Mobile & Email as recorded in the 
Demat Account. After successful 
authentication, user will be able to 
see the e-Voting option where the 
evoting is in progress and also able 
to directly access the system of all 
e-Voting Service Providers.

Individual 
Shareholders 
(holding securities 
in demat mode) 
login through 
their depository 
participants

You can also login using the login 
credentials of your demat account through 
your Depository Participant registered 
with NSDL/CDSL for e-Voting facility. Upon 
logging in, you will be able to see e-Voting 
option. Click on e-Voting option, you will 
be redirected to NSDL/CDSL Depository 
site 
after 
successful 
authentication, 

wherein you can see e-Voting feature. 
Click on company name or e-Voting 
service provider i.e. NSDL and you will be 
redirected to e-Voting website of NSDL 
for casting your vote during the remote 
e-Voting period or joining virtual meeting 
& voting during the meeting.

Important note: Shareholders who are unable to retrieve User ID/
Password are advised to use Forget User ID and Forget Password 
option available at above mentioned websites.

**Helpdesk for Individual Shareholders holding securities in demat 
mode for any technical issues related to login through Depository 
i.e. NSDL and CDSL.**

**Login type
Helpdesk details**

Individual 
Shareholders holding 
securities in demat 
mode with NSDL

Shareholders facing any technical issue 
in login can contact NSDL helpdesk by 
sending a request at  evoting@nsdl.com or 
call at 022 - 4886 7000 

Individual 
Shareholders holding 
securities in demat 
mode with CDSL

Shareholders facing any technical issue 
in login can contact CDSL helpdesk by 
sending a request at helpdesk.evoting@
cdslindia.com or contact at toll free no. 
1800 22 55 33

**'ks;jèkkjdksa dk çdkj
y‚fxu fofèk**

----

**B)	
Login Method for shareholders other than Individual 
shareholders holding securities in demat mode and 
shareholders holding securities in physical mode.**

**Steps to Log-in to NSDL e-Voting website**

1. 
Visit the e-Voting website of NSDL. Open web browser by typing 
the following URL: https://www.evoting.nsdl.com/ either on a 
Personal Computer or on a mobile. 

2. 
Once the home page of e-Voting system is launched, click on the icon 
“Login” which is available under ‘Shareholder/Member’ section.

3. 
A new screen will open. You will have to enter your User ID, your 
Password/OTP and a Verification Code as shown on the screen.

 
Alternatively, if you are registered for NSDL eservices, i.e., IDEAS, 

you can log-in at https://eservices.nsdl.com/ with your existing 

IDEAS login. Once you log-in to NSDL eservices after using your 

log-in credentials, click on e-Voting and you can proceed to Step 

2 i.e. Cast your vote electronically.

4. 
Your User ID details are as follows:

**Manner of holding shares 
i.e. Demat (NSDL or CDSL) or 
Physical**

**Your User ID is:**

a)  
For Shareholders who hold 
shares in demat account 
with NSDL.

8 Character DP ID followed by 8 
Digit Client ID. 

For example, if your DP ID 
is IN300*** and Client ID is 
12****** then your user ID is 
IN300***12******.

b)  
For Shareholders who hold 
shares in demat account 
with CDSL.

16 Digit Beneficiary ID

For example, if your Beneficiary 
ID 
is 
12************** 

then 
your 
user 
ID 
is 

12**************

c) 
For Shareholders holding 
shares in Physical Form.
EVEN Number followed by Folio 
Number registered with the Bank.

For example, if folio number 
is 001*** and EVEN is 101456 
then user ID is 101456001***

5. 
Password details for shareholders other than Individual 
shareholders are given below: 

a) 
If you are already registered for e-Voting, then you can use 
your existing password to login and cast your vote.

b) 
If you are using NSDL e-Voting system for the first time, 
you will need to retrieve the ‘initial password’ which was 
communicated to you. Once you retrieve your ‘initial 
password’, you need to enter the ‘initial password’ and the 
system will force you to change your password.

**4-	 vkidh ;wtj vkÃMh fooj.k bl çdkj gSa%**

**vkidk ;wtj vkÃMh gS%**

----

c) 
How to retrieve your ‘initial password’?

(i) 
If your email ID is registered in your demat 
account or with the Bank, your ‘initial password’ is 
communicated to you on your email ID. Trace the 
email sent to you from NSDL from your mailbox. 
Open the email and open the attachment i.e. a .pdf 
file. Open the .pdf file. The password to open the 
.pdf file is your 8 digit client ID for NSDL account, last 
8 digits of client ID for CDSL account or folio number 
for shares held in physical form. The .pdf file contains 
your ‘User ID’ and your ‘initial password’. 

(ii) 
If your email ID is not registered, please follow steps 
mentioned below in process for those shareholders 
whose email ids are not registered. 

6. 
If you are unable to retrieve or have not received the “Initial 
password” or have forgotten your password:

a) 
Click on “Forgot User Details/Password?” (If you are 
holding shares in your demat account with NSDL or CDSL) 
option available on www.evoting.nsdl.com 

b) 
Physical User Reset Password?” (If you are holding shares in 
physical mode) option available on www.evoting.nsdl.com

c) 
If you are still unable to get the password by aforesaid 
two options, you can send a request at evoting@nsdl.com 
mentioning your demat account number/folio number, 
your PAN, your name and your registered address, etc.

d) 
Shareholders can also use the OTP (One Time Password) 
based login for casting the votes on the e-Voting system of 
NSDL.

7. 
After entering your password, tick on Agree to “Terms and 
Conditions” by selecting on the check box.

8. 
Now, you will have to click on “Login” button.

9. 
After you click on the “Login” button, Home page of e-Voting 
will open.

**Step 2: Cast your vote electronically and join the AGM on NSDL 
e-Voting system**

1. 
After successful login at Step 1, you will be able to see all the 
companies “EVEN” in which you are holding shares and whose 
voting cycle and General Meeting is in ‘active’ status.

2. 
Select “EVEN” of Punjab National Bank for which you wish to 
cast your vote during the remote e-Voting period and casting 
your vote during the General Meeting. For joining the AGM 
virtually, you need to click on “VC/OAVM” link placed under 
“Join Meeting”.

3. 
Now you are ready for e-Voting as the Voting page opens.

7-	 viuk ikloMZ ntZ djus ds ckn] psd c‚Dl ij p;u djds “Terms 

and Conditions” ls lger ij fVd djsaA

**8-	 vc] vkidks Þy‚fxuÞ cVu ij fDyd djuk gksxkA**

----

4. 
Cast your vote by selecting appropriate options i.e. assent or 
dissent, verify/ modify the number of shares for which you 
wish to cast your vote and click on “Submit” and also “Confirm” 
when prompted.

5. 
Upon confirmation, the message “Vote cast successfully” will be 
displayed. 

6. 
You can also take the printout of the votes cast by you by clicking 
on the print option on the confirmation page.

**Once you confirm your vote on the resolution, you will not be 
allowed to modify your vote.**

**General Guidelines for shareholders**

1. 
Institutional shareholders (i.e. other than individuals, HUF, NRI 
etc.) are required to send scanned copy (PDF/JPG Format) of the 
relevant Board Resolution/Authority letter etc. with attested 
specimen signature of the duly authorized signatory(ies) 
who are authorized to vote, to the Scrutinizer by e-mail to 
sachincs2022@gmail.com with a copy marked to evoting@
nsdl.com. Institutional shareholders (i.e. other than individuals, 
HUF, NRI etc.) can also upload their Board Resolution/Authority 
Letter, etc. by clicking on "Upload Board Resolution/Authority 
Letter" displayed under "e-Voting" tab in their login.

2. 
It is strongly recommended not to share your password with 
any other person and take utmost care to keep your password 
confidential. Login to the e-voting website will be disabled upon 
five unsuccessful attempts to key in the correct password. In 
such an event, you will need to go through the “Forgot User 
Details/Password?” or “Physical User Reset Password?” option 
available on www.evoting.nsdl.com to reset the password. 

3. 
In case of any queries, shareholders may refer the Frequently 
Asked Questions (FAQs) for Shareholders and e-voting user 
manual for shareholders available at the download section 
of www.evoting.nsdl.com or call on.: 022-48867000 and 022-
24997000 or send a request to Ms. Pallavi Mhatre, Senior 
Manager at evoting@nsdl.com

**Process for those shareholders whose email ids are not registered 
with the depositories for procuring user id and password and 
registration of e-mail ids for e-voting for the resolutions set out in 
this Notice:**

1. 
In case shares are held in physical mode, please provide folio no., 
name of shareholder, scanned copy of the share certificate (front 
and back), self-attested scanned copy of PAN card and AADHAR 
card by e-mail to the Bank’s STA at beetalrta@gmail.com. 

2. 
In case shares are held in demat mode, please provide DPID-
CLID (16 digit DPID+CLID or 16 digit Beneficiary ID), name, client 
master or copy of consolidated account statement, self-attested 
scanned copy of PAN card and AADHAR Card) to the Bank’s STA 
at beetalrta@gmail.com. If you are an Individual shareholder, 

5-	 iqf"V gksus ij “Vote cast successfully” lans'k çnÆ'kr gksxkA

**'ks;jèkkjdksa ds fy, lkekU; fn'kkfunsZ'k**

----

holding securities in demat mode, you are requested to 
refer to the login method explained at Step 1 (A) i.e. “Login 
method for e-Voting and joining virtual meeting for Individual 
shareholders holding securities in demat mode”.

3. 
Alternatively, 
shareholders 
may 
send 
a 
request 
to  

evoting@nsdl.com for procuring user id and password for 
e-voting by providing the above mentioned documents.

4. 
In terms of SEBI circular dated December 9, 2020 on e-Voting 
facility provided by Listed Companies, Individual shareholders 
holding securities in demat mode are allowed to vote through 
their demat account maintained with Depositories and 
Depository Participants. Shareholders are required to update 
their mobile number and email ID correctly in their demat 
account in order to access e-Voting facility.

**Instructions for shareholders for E-Voting on the day of AGM are 
as under:**

1. 
The procedure for e-Voting on the day of the AGM is the same 
as the instructions mentioned above for remote e-voting.

2. 
Only those shareholders, who will be present in the AGM 
through VC/OAVM facility and have not cast their vote on the 
Resolution(s) through remote e-Voting and are otherwise not 
barred from doing so, shall be eligible to vote through e-Voting 
system in the AGM.

3. 
Shareholders who have voted through remote e-voting will be 
eligible to attend the AGM, however, they will not be eligible to 
vote at the AGM.

4. 
Vote on a resolution, once cast, cannot be changed subsequently.

5. 
The details of the persons who may be contacted for any 
grievances connected with the facility for e-voting on the day of 
the AGM shall be the same as mentioned for remote e-voting.

**Instructions for shareholders for attending the AGM through VC/
OAVM are as under:**

1. 
Shareholders will be provided with a facility to attend the 
AGM through VC/OAVM through the NSDL e-Voting system. 
Shareholders may access by following the steps mentioned 
above for Access to NSDL e-Voting system. After successful 
login, you can see link of “VC/OAVM link” placed under 
“Join Meeting” menu against the name of the Bank. You are 
requested to click on VC/OAVM link placed under ‘Join Meeting’ 
menu. The link for VC/OAVM will be available in ‘Shareholder/
Member login’ where the EVEN of Bank will be displayed. 
Please note that the Shareholders who do not have the User 
ID and Password for e-Voting or have forgotten the User ID 
and Password may retrieve the same by following the remote 
e-Voting instructions mentioned in the Notice to avoid last 
minute rush.

**4-	 ladYi ij ,d ckj oksV Mkyus ds ckn mls ckn esa ugÈ cnyk tk ldrk gSA**

----

2. 
Shareholders are encouraged to join the Meeting through 
Laptops for better experience. Further, shareholders should have 
internet with a good speed to avoid any disturbance during the 
meeting. Please note that the participants connecting via Mobile 
Hotspot may experience Audio/Video loss due to fluctuation in 
their respective network. It is therefore recommended to use 
Stable Wi-Fi or LAN connection to mitigate any kind of aforesaid 
glitches.

3. 
Shareholders, who would like to express their views/ask questions 
during the AGM with regard to the business to be transacted at 
the AGM, need to register themselves as a ‘Speaker’ by sending 
their request from their registered email id mentioning their 
name, DP ID and Client ID number/folio number and mobile 
number, to the Bank’s email id at hosd@pnb.co.in on or before 
05.00 p.m. of 21st June, 2024. Only those shareholders who have 
registered themselves as a ‘Speaker’, will be allowed to express 
their views/ ask questions during the meeting. 

4. 
Shareholders can submit questions with regard to the business 
to be transacted at the AGM from their registered email address, 
mentioning their name, DP ID and Client ID number/folio 
number and mobile number, to the Bank’s email id at hosd@
pnb.co.in in advance on or before 05.00 p.m. of 21st June, 2024. 
Shareholders who will participate in the AGM through VC/OAVM 
can also pose question/feedback through question box option. 
Such questions by the Shareholders shall be taken up during the 
meeting or suitably replied to by the Bank, later.

5. 
Institutional Investors, who are shareholders of the Bank, are 
requested to be present in the AGM through VC/OAVM Facility.

**9.	
Scrutinizer**

 
M/s Agarwal S. & Associates, Company Secretaries, has been 
appointed as the Scrutinizer by the Bank to scrutinize the 
e-voting process in a fair and transparent manner.

 
The Scrutinizer shall submit a consolidated Scrutinizer’s Report 
on the total votes cast to the Chairman of the Meeting within 
two working days of conclusion of the AGM and thereafter, the 
Bank shall declare the result of the voting forthwith by placing 
the Results along with the Scrutinizer’s Report on the website of 
Stock Exchanges, NSDL and the Bank.

**10.	 Unclaimed Dividend**

	
Shareholders are hereby informed that if any dividend amount 
remains unpaid/ unclaimed for 7 years from its due date, the 
said unpaid/unclaimed amount has to be transferred to the 
‘Investor Education & Protection Fund’ (IEPF), pursuant to 
Section 10B of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Act, 1970. The unpaid/unclaimed amount of 
Dividend upto FY 2015-16 has already been transferred to IEPF. 

 
The shareholders who have not received/claimed the dividend(s) 
for FY 2021-22 and FY 2022-23 are requested to claim the same 
at the earliest. If not claimed, the unpaid dividend will be 
transferred to IEPF in accordance with the timelines prescribed 
in the applicable guidelines.

**9- laoh{kd**

**10-	vnkok—r ykHkka'k**

----

 
The year-wise data of unpaid/unclaimed dividend lying with the 
Bank is available on the Bank’s website (www.pnbindia.in).

**11.	 Other Information**

a) 
Pursuant to the SEBI Circular No. SEBI/HO/CFD/CFD-PoD-
2/P/CIR/2023/167 dated 07th October, 2023 read with SEBI 
Circular No. SEBI/HO/CFD/PoD-2/P/CIR/2023/4 dated 05th 
January, 2023 and SEBI/HO/CFD/CMD2/CIR/P/2022/62 
dated 13th May, 2022 and the MCA General Circular No. 
09/2023 dated 25th September, 2023 read with its preceding 
Circulars, the Annual Report for FY 2023-24 containing 
the Notice of the 23rd Annual General Meeting (AGM) of 
the Bank, inter alia, indicating the process and manner of 
e-voting etc. is being sent only in electronic mode to all 
the shareholders whose email IDs are registered with the 
Bank’s STA/Depository Participant(s). 

b) 
Shareholders may also note that the Annual Report for 
FY 2023-24 inter alia containing the Notice of AGM is 
also being made available on the Bank’s website www.
pnbindia.in, websites of the Stock Exchanges i.e. BSE 
Limited and National Stock Exchange of India Limited at 
www.bseindia.com and www.nseindia.com respectively, 
and on the website of NSDL i.e. www.evoting.nsdl.com

c) 
In view of the ‘Green Initiatives’ undertaken by the 
Bank, shareholders holding shares in physical form are 
requested to get their email ids registered with the Bank’s 
STA in case of shares held in physical form and Depository 
Participant in case of shares held in electronic form. 

d) 
In case of changes, if any, pertaining to name, postal 
address, email address, telephone/mobile number, 
Permanent 
Account 
Number 
(PAN), 
mandates, 

nominations, bank details such as, name of the bank and 
branch details, bank account number, MICR code, IFSC 
code, etc., the shareholders may get the same updated 
with the Bank’s STA, in case of shares held in physical 
form, and with their respective Depository Participant(s), 
in case of shares held in electronic form.

e) 
Shareholders who hold shares in physical form in multiple 
folios in identical names or joint names in the same order 
of names are requested to send their share certificates to 
the STA for consolidation into a single folio.

f) 
Dematerialization of Physical Holdings: As per Regulation 
40 of SEBI Listing Regulations, as amended, all requests 
for transfer of securities including transmission and 
transposition requests shall be processed only in 
dematerialized form. In view of the same and to eliminate 
all risks associated with physical shares and avail various 
benefits of dematerialisation, Shareholders are advised to 
dematerialise the shares held by them in physical form. 
Shareholders can contact the Bank or Bank’s STA for 
assistance in this regard.

**11-  vU; tkudkjh**

----

g) 
The process of dematerialisation of shares is available on 
the Bank’s website i.e. https://www.pnbindia.in/ under 
‘Investor Info’.

**Explanatory Statement:**

	

Item No.3:  

In terms of Regulation 23(4) of SEBI Listing Regulations, all 
material related party transactions require prior approval of 
shareholders by way of an ordinary resolution, notwithstanding 
the fact that the same are at an arm’s length basis and in the 
ordinary course of business. A related party transaction is 
considered as ‘material’ if the transaction to be entered into 
individually or taken together with previous transactions during 
a financial year exceeds ₹1000 Crore or 10% of the annual 
consolidated turnover of the listed entity as per the last audited 
financial statements of the listed entity, whichever is lower.

In view of the above, approval of the Shareholders is sought 
for the following proposed Material Related Party Transactions:

**Particulars
Details of Transactions**

Name of 
Related Party
and its 
relationship 
with the Bank

PNB Gilts Limited 

(Subsidiary)
PNB Housing 

Finance 

Limited
(Associate)

PNB Metlife 

India 

Insurance 

Company 

Limited 

(Associate)

Type of 
Transaction
Outright 
securities 

t r a n s a c t i o n s 
(sale/ purchase of 
securities), 
Money 

Market transactions, 
Primary subscription 
of securities, Security 
Arranger services in 
PNBs NCD issuances 
through 
EBP 
in 

which PNB Gilts may 
be arranger/one of 
the arrangers to the 
issue and also such 
other 
transactions 

such as purchase/
sale of Government 
Securities 
(G-Sec), 

Bonds/Debentures of 
PSUs, other bodies, 
as may be disclosed 
in the notes forming 
part of the Financial 
Statements for the 
relevant 
Financial 

Year.

Outright 
securities 

transactions 
(sale 

/ 
purchase 
of 

securities), 
Money 

Market 
transactions, 

Primary 
subscription 

of securities and also 
such other transactions 
such 
as 
purchase/
sale 
of 
Government 

Securities (G-Sec), Bonds/
Debentures 
of 
PSUs, 

other bodies, as may be 
disclosed in the notes 
forming 
part 
of 
the 

Financial Statements for 
the relevant Financial Year

**O;k[;kRed dFku%**

**	 en la[;k 3%**

**fooj.k 
ysunsu dk fooj.k**

**ih,uch 
esVykbQ 
bafM;k ba';ksjsal 
daiuh fyfeVsM 
¼,lksfl,V½**

----

**Particulars
Details of Transactions**

Material 
terms and 
particulars of 
the proposed 
transaction

Outright securities transactions/money Market 
transactions/ Primary subscriptions of securities, 
will be done as per the prevailing market price/
Fair value of securities in line with Bank's Policy 
Guidelines. 

Arranger services of PNB Gilts for NCD issuances 
shall be utilised as per PNB’s issue requirement 
and payment of arrangership fee shall be uniform 
to all the arrangers as decided by the Bank.

Value of the 
proposed 
transaction 
(₹ in Crore)

6000.00
6000.00
2000.00

Nature of 
concern or 
interest of 
the related 
party 
(financial or 
otherwise)

Financial

Percentage 
of Bank’s 
Annual 
Consolidated 
Turnover, 
for the 
immediately 
preceding 
financial year, 
represented 
by the 
value of the 
proposed 
transaction 
(Based on 
Consolidated 
Total Income 
of the Bank 
for FY ended 
31.03.2024)

4.90%
4.90%
1.63%

Transaction relating to any loans, inter-corporate deposits, advances 
or investments made or given by the Bank or its subsidiary:

(i) Details of 

Financial 
Indebtedness 
incurred

The Bank will not incur any specific Financial 
indebtedness. The funds will be utilized from 
normal course of Banking.

(ii) Tenure
The Transactions are proposed to be undertaken 
from the date of AGM for FY 2023-24 (i.e., 
29.06.2024) till the date of next AGM for a period 
not exceeding fifteen months. The Tenure will be 
as per terms of the securities issued.

**fooj.k 
ysunsu dk fooj.k**

**çLrkfor ysunsu 
dh rkfRod 'krs± 
vkSj fooj.k**

6000.00
6000.00
2000.00

**foÙkh;**

4.90%
4.90%
1.63%

----

**Particulars
Details of Transactions**

(iii) Applicable 

terms, 
including 
covenants, 
tenure, 
interest 
rate and 
repayment 
schedule, 
whether 
secured or 
unsecured; 
if secured, 
the nature 
of security.

The 
applicable 
terms 
including 
covenants, 

repayment schedule, whether secured/unsecured, 
etc. will be as per the terms of the issuance of 
securities. The proposed Transactions, shall be 
undertaken on an arm's length basis in the normal 
course of business of the Bank in accordance with 
the Bank’s Policy/Regulatory Guidelines.

The securities shall be priced at Fair Market Value 
as per the prevailing market practice.  

(iv) The 

purpose 
for which 
the funds 
will be 
utilized 
by the 
ultimate 
beneficiary 
of such 
funds 
pursuant 
to the RPT.

The funds will be utilized solely for the intended 
purpose as approved by the Competent Authority.

Justification 
as to why the 
RPT is in the 
interest of the 
Bank 

The Bank is engaged in purchase/sale of 
securities (issued by Government of India, State 
Governments, PSUs, Corporates etc. which may 
be related or unrelated to the Bank) during its 
normal course of business, to optimise profits from 
trading/investment portfolio by taking advantage 
of market opportunities and the transaction is 
therefore, in the interest of the Bank.
Further, PNB Gilts is one of the major players in Debt 
Market and is a primary dealer. The transactions 
shall be carried out at Market rates, so that PNB 
does not miss out on a market opportunity.

Valuation or 
other external 
party report

Not applicable

The value of the proposed transactions between the Bank on 
one side and each of the aforementioned Related Parties, on the 
other side, is more than ₹1000 Crore [i.e. above the threshold 
of ‘material related party transactions’ under the SEBI Listing 
Regulations i.e. ₹1000 Crore or 10% of the Annual Consolidated 
Turnover  of the Bank as per the last audited financial statements 
of the Bank, whichever is lower] The transactions will be executed 
with the Related Parties on an arm’s length basis and in the 
ordinary course of business of the Bank.

**fooj.k 
ysunsu dk fooj.k**

**vkjihVh cSad ds 
fgr esa D;ksa gS 
bldk vkSfpR;**

**ewY;kadu ;k 
vU; cká i{k 
dh fjiksVZ**

**ykxw ugÈ**

----

None of the Directors, Key Managerial Personnel and their 
relatives, other than to the extent of their shareholding/
directorships, if any, in the Bank and in any of the entities 
mentioned above, if any, are concerned/interested in the above 
resolution.

The Audit Committee of the Board has accorded approval for 
the aforesaid Material Related Party Transactions. 

The Board has also recommended that the proposed material 
related party transactions placed at Item No. 3, be placed 
before the shareholders as Ordinary Resolution at the AGM for 
seeking their approval.

The Shareholders may please note that, in terms of provisions 
of the SEBI Listing Regulations, no related party(ies) shall vote 
to approve the Ordinary Resolution at Item No. 3 of the Notice.

	

Item No.4:  

In terms of Regulation 23(4) of SEBI Listing Regulations, all 
material related party transactions require prior approval of 
shareholders by way of an ordinary resolution, notwithstanding 
the fact that the same are at an arm’s length basis and in the 
ordinary course of business. A related party transaction is 
considered as ‘material’ if the transaction to be entered into 
individually or taken together with previous transactions during 
a financial year exceeds ₹1000 Crore or 10% of the annual 
consolidated turnover of the listed entity as per the last audited 
financial statements of the listed entity, whichever is lower.

In view of the above, approval of the Shareholders is sought 
for the following proposed Material Related Party Transactions:

Particulars
Details of Transactions

Name of Related 
Party and its 
relationship with the 
Bank

PNB Gilts Limited 

(Subsidiary)
PNB Housing 

Finance Limited 

(Associate)

Type of Transaction 
Loans and Advances in the form of Term 
Loans, Line of Credit, Overdraft, etc., as 
part of its normal banking business to its 
customers including related parties.

Material terms and 
particulars of the 
proposed transaction

The terms and conditions of the proposed 
transactions shall be in accordance with 
the Bank’s Policy/Regulatory Guidelines. 

Value of the 
proposed transaction  
(₹ in Crore)

4000.00
7100.00

Nature of concern 
or interest of 
the related party 
(financial or 
otherwise)

Financial

**	 en la[;k 4%**

**fooj.k
ysu&nsu dk fooj.k**

**çLrkfor ysunsu ds 
HkkSfrd fu;e vkSj 
fooj.k**

çLrkfor ysunsu dk 
ewY;¼₹ djksM+ esa½

4000.00
7100.00

**lacafèkr i{k ds ljksdkj 
;k fgr dh ç—fr 
¼foÙkh; ;k vU;Fkk½**

**foÙkh;**

----

Percentage of Bank’s 
Annual Consolidated 
Turnover, for 
the immediately 
preceding financial 
year, represented 
by the value of 
the proposed 
transaction (Based 
on Consolidated 
Total Income of the 
Bank for FY ended 
31.03.2024)

3.27%
5.80%

Transaction relating to any loans, inter-corporate deposits, 
advances or investments made or given by the Bank or its 
subsidiary:
(i) Details of 

Financial 
Indebtedness 
incurred

The Bank will not incur any specific 
Financial indebtedness. The funds will be 
utilized from normal course of banking.

(ii)  Tenure 
The Transactions are proposed to be 
undertaken from the date of AGM for FY 
2023-24 (i.e., 29.06.2024) till the date 
of next AGM for a period not exceeding 
fifteen months. The Tenure of the credit 
facilities will be as per the terms of 
sanction in accordance with Bank’s Policy/ 
Regulatory Guidelines.
(iii) Applicable 

terms, including 
covenants, 
tenure, interest 
rate and 
repayment 
schedule, 
whether secured 
or unsecured; 
if secured, 
the nature of 
security. 

The applicable terms including Covenants, 
whether secured/ unsecured, nature of 
security, etc., will be in accordance with 
the Bank’s Policy/Regulatory Guidelines 
and as agreed to by the borrowers. The 
Transactions, shall be undertaken on an 
arm's length basis in the normal course of 
business of the Bank.
The interest rates shall be based on 
prevailing market rate or linked to external 
benchmark.
Repayment Schedule shall be as per the 
terms agreed to with the borrowers.

(iv) The purpose for 

which the funds 
will be utilized 
by the ultimate 
beneficiary 
of such funds 
pursuant to the 
RPT.

As specified at the time of availing the 
credit facilities.

Justification as to 
why the RPT is in the 
interest of the Bank 

The transactions are proposed to be 
undertaken in furtherance of the business 
of the Bank and shall be in accordance 
with the laid down norms, policies and 
procedures and therefore, in the interest 
of the Bank. 

Valuation or other 
external party report
Not applicable

3.27%
5.80%

----

	 en la[;k 5%

 
The value of the proposed transactions between the Bank on 
one side and each of the aforementioned Related Parties, on the 
other side, is more than ₹1000 Crore [i.e. above the threshold 
of ‘material related party transactions’ under the SEBI Listing 
Regulations i.e. ₹1000 Crore or 10% of the Annual Consolidated 
Turnover of the Bank as per the last audited financial statements 
of the Bank, whichever is lower]. The transactions will be 
executed with the Related Parties on an arm’s length basis and 
in the ordinary course of business of the Bank.

 
None of the Directors, Key Managerial Personnel and their 
relatives, other than to the extent of their shareholding/
directorships, if any, in the Bank and in any of the entities 
mentioned above, if any, are concerned/interested in the above 
resolution.

 
The Audit Committee of the Board has accorded approval for 
the aforesaid Material Related Party Transactions. 

 
The Board has also recommended that the proposed material 
related party transactions placed at Item No. 4, be placed 
before the shareholders as Ordinary Resolution at the AGM for 
seeking their approval.

 
The Shareholders may please note that, in terms of provisions 
of the SEBI Listing Regulations, no related party(ies) shall vote to 
approve the Ordinary Resolution at Item No. 4 of the Notice.

	

Item No. 5:

In terms of Regulation 23(4) of SEBI Listing Regulations, all 
material related party transactions require prior approval of 
shareholders by way of an ordinary resolution, notwithstanding 
the fact that the same are at an arm’s length basis and in the 
ordinary course of business. A related party transaction is 
considered as ‘material’ if the transaction to be entered into 
individually or taken together with previous transactions during 
a financial year exceeds ₹1000 Crore or 10% of the annual 
consolidated turnover of the listed entity as per the last audited 
financial statements of the listed entity, whichever is lower.

----

cafx;k xzkeh.k 
fodkl cSad 
¼,lksfl,V½

fgekpy çns'k 
xzkeh.k cSad 
¼,lksfl,V½

ef.kiqj 
xzkeh.k cSad 
¼,lksfl,V½

iatkc 
xzkeh.k cSad 
¼,lksfl,V½

çFkek ;wih 
xzkeh.k cSad 
¼,lksfl,V½

f=iqjk 
xzkeh.k cSad 
¼,lksfl,V½

nf{k.k fcgkj 
xzkeh.k cSad 
¼,lksfl,V½

loZ gfj;k.kk  
xzkeh.k cSad 
¼,lksfl,V½

foÙkh;

6000.00
6000.00
2000.00
2000.00
2000.00
10000.00
2000.00
2000.00
2000.00

4.90%
4.90%
1.63%
1.63%
1.63%
8.17%
1.63%
1.63%
1.63%

fufèk dk mi;ksx dsoy ml bfPNr mÌs'; ds fy, fd;k tk,xk ftls l{ke izkf/kdkjh }kjk vuqeksfnr fd;k x;k gSA

----

**In view of the above, approval of the Shareholders is sought for the following proposed Material Related Party Transactions:**

**Particulars
Details of Transactions**

Name of Related Party 
and its relationship  
with the Bank

Assam Gramin 

Vikash Bank 

(Associate)

Bangiya 

Gramin 

Vikash Bank 

(Associate)

Himachal 

Pradesh 

Gramin Bank 

(Associate)

Manipur 

Rural Bank 
(Associate)

Punjab 

Gramin Bank 

(Associate)

Prathama UP 
Gramin Bank 

(Associate)

Tripura 

Gramin Bank 

(Associate)

Dakshin Bihar 

Gramin Bank 

(Associate) 

Sarva Haryana 

Gramin Bank 

(Associate)

Type of Transaction 
Inter-Bank Participation Certificate (IBPC) Transactions

Material terms and 
particulars of the 
proposed transaction 

IBPC transactions will be undertaken at the prices decided by the Competent Authority as per the Bank guidelines and shall be carried 
out on an arm's length basis.

Nature of concern or 
interest of the related 
party (financial or 
otherwise)

Financial

Value of the proposed 
transaction (₹ in Crore)
6000.00
6000.00
2000.00
2000.00
2000.00
10000.00
2000.00
2000 .00
2000 .00

Percentage of Bank’s 
Annual Consolidated 
Turnover, for the 
immediately preceding 
financial year, 
represented by the 
value of the proposed 
transaction (Based 
on Consolidated Total 
Income of the Bank for 
FY ended 31.03.2024)

4.90%
4.90%
1.63%
1.63%
1.63%
8.17%
1.63%
1.63%
1.63%

Transactions relating to any loans, inter-corporate deposits, advances or investments made or given by the Bank or its subsidiary viz.:

(i) Details of Financial 

Indebtedness 
incurred 

The Bank will not incur any specific financial indebtedness in order to undertake such transactions. The funds will be utilized from normal 
course of banking.

(ii) Tenure
The transactions are proposed to be undertaken from the date of AGM for FY 2023-24 (i.e., 29.06.2024) till the date of next AGM for a 
period not exceeding fifteen months. The tenure of the credit facility will be as per the terms of sanction in accordance with the Bank’s 
Policy / regulatory Guidelines.

(iii) Applicable 

terms, including 
covenants, tenure, 
interest rate 
and repayment 
schedule, 
whether secured 
or unsecured; 
if secured, 
the nature of 
security. 

IBPC transactions will be carried out at the prices decided by the Competent Authority as per the Bank’s Guidelines. Such transactions 
shall be on an arm's length basis.

(iv) The purpose for 

which the funds 
will be utilized 
by the ultimate 
beneficiary of such 
funds pursuant to 
the RPT. 

The funds will be utilized solely for the intended purpose which has been approved by the Competent Authority.

Justification as to 
why the RPT is in the 
interest of the Bank.

These transactions are undertaken as per the credit decision of the Bank according to the prevalent Market rates and Bank’s Policy 
Guidelines. The Bank actively engages in such transactions for business growth opportunities and the transactions are therefore in the 
interest of the Bank.

Valuation or other 
external party report
Not applicable.

----

	 en la[;k 6%  

fooj.k
ysunsu dk fooj.k

ysunsu dk çdkj
pkyw [kkrk tekjkf'k

9.80
9.80

cSd ;k mldh lgk;d dEiuh }kjk fd, x, ;k fn, x, fdlh Hkh _.k] varj&dkWiksZjsV tek] vfxze ;k fuos'k ls lacaf/kr ysusnsu tSls%

----

The value of the proposed transactions between the Bank on one side and each of the aforementioned Related Parties, on the other side, is 
more than ₹1000 Crore [i.e. above the threshold of ‘material related party transactions’ under the SEBI Listing Regulations i.e. ₹1000 Crore 
or 10% of the Annual Consolidated Turnover of the Bank as per the last audited financial statements of the Bank, whichever is lower]. The 
transactions will be executed with the Related Parties on an arm’s length basis and in the ordinary course of business of the Bank.

None of the Directors, Key Managerial Personnel and their relatives, other than to the extent of their shareholding/directorships, if any, in 
the Bank and in any of the entities mentioned above, if any, are concerned/interested in the above resolution.

The Audit Committee of the Board has accorded approval for the aforesaid Material Related Party Transactions. 

The Board has also recommended that the proposed material related party transactions placed at Item No. 5, be placed before the 
shareholders as Ordinary Resolution at the AGM for seeking their approval.

The Shareholders may please note that, in terms of provisions of the SEBI Listing Regulations, no related party(ies) shall vote to approve the 
Ordinary Resolution at Item No. 5 of the Notice.

	

Item No.6:  

 
In terms of Regulation 23(4) of SEBI Listing Regulations, all material related party transactions require prior approval of shareholders by 
way of an ordinary resolution, notwithstanding the fact that the same are at an arm’s length basis and in the ordinary course of business. 
A related party transaction is considered as ‘material’ if the transaction to be entered into individually or taken together with previous 
transactions during a financial year exceeds ₹1000 Crore or 10% of the annual consolidated turnover of the listed entity as per the last 
audited financial statements of the listed entity, whichever is lower.

 
In view of the above, approval of the Shareholders is sought for the following proposed Material Related Party Transactions:

**Particulars
Details of Transactions**

Name of Related Party and its relationship 
with the Bank
PNB Gilts Limited (Subsidiary)
PNB Housing Finance Limited (Associate)

Type of Transaction
Current Account Deposits

Material terms and particulars of the 
proposed transaction
The Bank levies normal banking charges on the current accounts of Customers for various 
services in line with the Bank's Policy Guidelines. Currently, no interest is paid on current 
account balance maintained by the customers.

Tenure of the proposed Transaction
The transactions are proposed to be undertaken from the date of AGM for FY 2023-24 (i.e., 
29.06.2024) till the date of next AGM for a period not exceeding fifteen months.

Value of the proposed transaction 
(₹ in Crore)
12000.00
12000.00

Nature of concern or interest of the related 
party (financial or otherwise)
Financial

Percentage of Bank’s Annual Consolidated 
Turnover, for the immediately preceding 
financial year, represented by the value of the 
proposed transaction (Based on Consolidated 
Total Income of the Bank for FY ended 
31.03.2024)

9.80
9.80

Other details of Transaction relating to any loans, inter-corporate deposits, advances or investments made or given by the Bank or its subsidiary viz.:

----

¼i½	 fd, x, foÙkh; _.k dk fooj.k

¼ii½	 dk;Zdky 

ykxw ugÈ

	 en la[;k 7%

----

(i) 
Details 
of 
Financial 
Indebtedness 

incurred
(ii) 
Tenure
(iii) Applicable terms, including covenants, 

tenure, interest rate and repayment 
schedule, 
whether 
secured 
or 

unsecured; if secured, the nature of 
security.
(iv) Purpose for which the funds will be 

utilized by the ultimate beneficiary of 
such funds pursuant to the RPT.

Not Applicable

Justification as to why the RPT is in the interest 
of the Bank
The transactions are proposed to be undertaken in furtherance of the banking business of the 
Bank with its customers, which may include related parties of the Bank.
Valuation or other external party report
Not applicable

The value of the proposed transactions between the Bank on one side and each of the aforementioned Related Parties, on the other side, is more 
than ₹1000 Crore [i.e. above the threshold of ‘material related party transactions’ under the SEBI Listing Regulations i.e. ₹1000 Crore or 10% of 
the Annual Consolidated Turnover of the Bank as per the last audited financial statements of the Bank, whichever is lower]. The transactions will 
be executed with the Related Parties on an arm’s length basis and in the ordinary course of business of the Bank.

None of the Directors, Key Managerial Personnel and their relatives, other than to the extent of their shareholding/directorships, if any, in the 
Bank and in any of the entities mentioned above, if any, are concerned/interested in the above resolution.

The Audit Committee of the Board has accorded approval for the aforesaid Material Related Party Transactions. 

The Board has also recommended that the proposed material related party transactions placed at Item No. 6, be placed before the shareholders 
as Ordinary Resolution at the AGM for seeking their approval.

The Shareholders may please note that, in terms of provisions of the SEBI Listing Regulations, no related party(ies) shall vote to approve the 
Ordinary Resolution at Item No. 6 of the Notice.

	

Item No.7:  

 
In terms of Regulation 23(4) of SEBI Listing Regulations, all material related party transactions require prior approval of shareholders by 
way of an ordinary resolution, notwithstanding the fact that the same are at an arm’s length basis and in the ordinary course of business. 
A related party transaction is considered as ‘material’ if the transaction to be entered into individually or taken together with previous 
transactions during a financial year exceeds ₹1000 Crore or 10% of the annual consolidated turnover of the listed entity as per the last 
audited financial statements of the listed entity, whichever is lower.

 
In view of the above, approval of the Shareholders is sought for the following proposed Material Related Party Transactions:

**Particulars
Details of Transactions**

Name of Related Party and its relationship with the Bank
Druk PNB Bank Limited  
(International Subsidiary)
Everest Bank Limited  
(International Joint Venture)

Type of Transaction 
Transactions in the Nostro Accounts

Material terms and particulars of the proposed transaction
As per standard terms & conditions for facilitating funds transfer of 
customers between two Banks.

Tenure of the proposed Transaction
The transactions are proposed to be undertaken from the date of AGM 
for FY 2023-24 (i.e., 29.06.2024) till the date of next AGM for a period 
not exceeding fifteen months.

Value of the proposed transaction (₹ in Crore)
6000-00
12000-00

Nature of concern or interest of the related party (financial or 
otherwise)
Financial

----

4.90
9.80

ykxw ugÈ

funs'kd e.My ds vkns'k ls 
—rs iatkc uS'kuy cSad 

----

Percentage of Bank’s Annual Consolidated Turnover, for the 
immediately preceding financial year, represented by the value of 
the proposed transaction (Based on Consolidated Total Income of 
the Bank for FY ended 31.03.2024)

4.90
9.80

Other details of Transaction relating to any loans, inter-corporate 
deposits, advances or investments made or given by the Bank or its 
subsidiary viz.:

(i) 
Details of Financial Indebtedness incurred

(ii) 
Tenure

(iii) Applicable terms, including covenants, tenure, interest rate 

and repayment schedule, whether secured or unsecured; if 
secured, the nature of security.

(iv) Purpose for which the funds will be utilized by the ultimate 

beneficiary of such funds pursuant to the RPT.

Not Applicable

Justification as to why the RPT is in the interest of the Bank
These transactions are proposed to be undertaken in furtherance of the 
business of the Bank with customers which may include related parties 
of the Bank.

Valuation or other external party report
Not applicable

The value of the proposed transactions between the Bank on one side and each of the aforementioned Related Parties, on the other side, is more 
than ₹1000 Crore [i.e. above the threshold of ‘material related party transactions’ under the SEBI Listing Regulations i.e. ₹1000 Crore or 10% of 
the Annual Consolidated Turnover of the Bank as per the last audited financial statements of the Bank, whichever is lower]. The transactions will 
be executed with the Related Parties on an arm’s length basis and in the ordinary course of business of the Bank.

None of the Directors, Key Managerial Personnel and their relatives, other than to the extent of their shareholding/directorships, if any, in the 
Bank and in any of the entities mentioned above, if any, are concerned/interested in the above resolution.

The Audit Committee of the Board has accorded approval for the aforesaid Material Related Party Transactions. 

The Board has also recommended that the proposed material related party transactions placed at Item No. 7, be placed before the shareholders 
as Ordinary Resolution at the AGM for seeking their approval.

The Shareholders may please note that, in terms of provisions of the SEBI Listing Regulations, no related party(ies) shall vote to approve the 
Ordinary Resolution at Item No. 7 of the Notice.

**By order of the Board of Directors
     For Punjab National Bank**

**Place: New Delhi  
 
 
 
 
          
      (Ekta Pasricha)
Date: 03.06.2024  
 
 
 
 
           
  Company Secretary**

----

**Annexure**

**Instructions on Deduction of Tax at Source on Dividend**

As per the Income-tax Act, 1961 (the Act), as amended by the Finance 
Act, 2020, dividend paid or distributed by Bank after April 1, 2020 
shall be taxable in the hands of the shareholders. The Bank shall 
therefore be required to deduct tax at source (TDS) under section 
194 of the Act or section 195 of the Act at the prescribed rates at the 
time of making the payment of the said dividend to shareholders. 
The TDS rate would vary depending on the residential status of the 
shareholder and the documents submitted by them and accepted by 
the Bank. Further, higher rate of TDS would be applicable if pursuant 
to section 206AA of the Act, valid permanent account number (PAN) 
has not been provided by shareholder and/or pursuant to section 
206AB of the Act, shareholder being a specified person*.

*A specified person is one who has not complied with filing of income tax 
returns for last one year and is having TDS and/or Tax Collection at Source 
(TCS) of ₹50,000 or more in last one year. A non-resident not having permanent 
establishment in India is not considered as a specified person.

Accordingly, the final dividend will be paid by the Bank after deducting 
tax at source, as applicable, as explained herein.

**A.	
Resident Shareholders**

1. 
For Resident Shareholders, TDS will be applicable at 10% on 
the amount of dividend. In case, valid PAN is not provided or 
shareholder is a specified person, then the TDS will be applicable 
at 20% of the amount of dividend. Accordingly, shareholders 
who have not provided their PAN are requested to provide the 
same to the Bank or its Registrar and Share Transfer Agent (STA) 
viz. Beetal Financial & Computer Services (Pvt.) Ltd., (in respect 
of shares held in physical form) or to the Depository Participant 
(in respect of shares held in electronic form), immediately.

 
Shareholders are required to link their Aadhaar number with 
PAN as required under Section 139AA(2) read with rule114AAA, 
before the Record Date. If any PAN is found to have not been 
linked with Aadhaar within the stipulated timelines, then such 
PAN shall be deemed inoperative and TDS will be deducted at 
higher rate under section 206AA of the Act. The Bank reserves 
its right to recover any demand raised subsequently on the 
Bank for not informing or providing wrong information about 
applicability of Section 206AA.

 
No tax shall be deducted on the dividend payable if either of the 
below two conditions are fulfilled:

 •
Total dividend payable to a resident individual shareholder 
does not exceed ₹5,000 per year OR

 •
The shareholder has provided duly filled and signed Form 

**vuqyXud**

**ykHkka'k ij VhMh,l dh dVkSrh ij funsZ'k**

**,-	 fuoklh 'ks;jèkkjd**

----

**15G (applicable to any Person other than a company or 
a Firm)/ Form 15H (applicable to an Individual above the 
age of 60 years) with valid PAN and provided that all the 
required eligibility conditions are met.**

**2. 
The following Tax Resident Shareholders should be eligible for 
Nil/Lower Rate of TDS upon providing the documents to the 
Bank mentioned hereunder to the satisfaction of the Bank:**

Sr.  
No. 
Particulars
Applicable 
Rate of TDS 
Documents Required 

a)
Insurance Companies
Nil
 •
 Declaration that it is an 
Insurance Company as 
specified under Proviso to 
section 194 of the Act 

 •
 Self-attested copy of 
certificate of registration 
with IRDAI 

 •
 Self-attested copy of PAN 
card 

b)
Government, Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI), 
Specified Corporations 
established by or 
under Central Act 
whose income is 
exempt from tax, 
and Mutual Funds 
specified under 
section 

10(23D) of the Act 

Nil
 •
Declaration that it is 
covered by section 
196(iii) of the Act read 
with the Circulars issued 
thereunder. 

 •
Self-attested copy of 
relevant registration 
documents. 

 •
Self-attested copy of PAN 
card.

c)
Category - I & II 
Alternative Investment 
Funds (AIF) registered 
with the Securities 
and Exchange Board of 
India (SEBI) 

Nil
 •
Declaration that their 
income is exempt under 
section 10(23FBA) of the 
Act and they are governed 
by SEBI regulations as 
Category I or Category 
II AIF. 

 •
Self-attested copy of SEBI 
AIF registration certificate. 

 •
 Self-attested copy of the 
PAN card. 

d)
NPS Trust
Nil
 •
 Declaration that the 
trust is governed by the 
provisions of Section 
10(44) [sub-section 1E to 
section 197A] of the Act 
along with Self-attested 
copy of registration 
documents.

e)
Shareholders 
exempted from TDS 
provisions in terms of 
any provisions of the 
Act or CBDT Circular or 
notification 

Nil
 •
 Declaration that it is 
covered by CBDT circular 
or Notification. 

 •
 Documentary evidence 
supporting the exemption 
status in terms of any 
provisions of the Act 
or CBDT Circular or 
notification. 

 •
 Self-attested copy of PAN 
card. 

**Ø- 
la-
fooj.k
VhMh,l dh 
ykxw nj
vko';d nLrkost+**

----

Sr.  
No. 
Particulars
Applicable 
Rate of TDS 
Documents Required 

f)
All resident 
shareholders 

Rate 

specified 

in the low 
deduction 
certificate 

issued 
by the 

income tax 

department 

 •
 Self-attested copy of 
certificate under section 
197 of the Act 
[issued in Bank’s TAN 
DELP3704D]

**B.	
Non-Resident Shareholders**

1. 
For Non-resident institutional shareholders being Foreign 
Institutional Investors/Foreign Portfolio Investor (FIIs/FPIs), TDS 
will be applicable under section 196D of the Act, at 20% or as 
per the rate in any applicable Double Tax Avoidance Agreement 
(tax treaty) on submission of documents mentioned below, 
whichever is lower, on the amount of dividend payable.

2. 
For other Non-resident shareholders, TDS will be applicable in 
accordance with the provisions of section 195 of the Act, at the 
rates in force which is currently 20% or as per the rate in any 
applicable tax treaty on submission of documents mentioned 
below, whichever is lower, on the amount of dividend payable.

3. 
The non-resident shareholders who has a permanent 
establishment in India and is a specified person would be liable 
for twice the rate of TDS as applicable to them.

4. 
If certificate under section 197/195 of the Act is obtained by 
non-resident shareholders for lower/Nil withholding of taxes, 
rate specified in the said certificate shall be considered based 
on submission of self-attested copy of the same.

Pursuant to section 90(2) of the Act, non-resident shareholders 
(other than Depository for ADRs) have the option to avail the benefit 
of tax treaty between India and the countries of their tax residence 
for which such non-resident shareholders will have to provide the 
following documents, to the satisfaction of the Bank:

1. 
Self-attested copy of the PAN allotted by the Indian Income 
Tax Authorities; If the PAN is not allotted, please submit self-
declaration.

2. 
Self-attested copy of Tax Residency Certificate (TRC) (for FY 
2023-24) obtained from the tax authorities of the country of 
which the shareholder is resident. In case, the TRC is furnished 
in a language other than English, the said TRC would have to be 
translated from such other language to English language and 
thereafter duly notarized and apostilled copy of the TRC would 
have to be provided.

3. 
Self-declaration in Form 10F for FY 2023-24 if all the details 
required in this Form are not mentioned in the TRC.

**Ø- 
la-
fooj.k
VhMh,l dh 
ykxw nj
vko';d nLrkost+**

**ch-	vfuoklh 'ks;jèkkjd**

----

4. 
Self-declaration by the non-resident shareholder as to:

 •
Eligibility to claim tax treaty benefits based on the tax 
residential status of the shareholder; 

 •
The shareholder did not at any time during the relevant 
year have permanent establishment/fixed base in India in 
accordance with the applicable tax treaty; 

 •
The shareholder being the beneficial owner of the dividend 
income to be received on the equity shares.

Please note that in case of non-resident shareholders, Self Declaration 
of No Permanent Establishment and beneficial ownership should be 
on the letterhead of the shareholder for claiming tax treaty benefits 
or/and to avoiding higher TDS as per section 206AB of the Act.

Please note that the Bank in its sole and absolute discretion reserves 
the right to call for any further information and/or to apply domestic 
law/tax treaty for TDS.

**General Instructions:**

1. 
All the above referred TDS rates shall be duly enhanced by 
applicable surcharge and cess, wherever applicable. However, 
if the TDS rate as per DTAA is applied, no surcharge or cess is 
leviable.

2. 
Shareholders holding shares in dematerialized mode, are 
requested to update their records such as tax residential status, 
PAN, address, bank account details, email addresses and mobile 
numbers with their depository participants. Shareholders 
holding shares in physical mode are requested to furnish their 
details to the Bank or Bank’s STA.

 
Please note that for the purpose of complying with the 
applicable TDS provisions, the Bank will rely on the above-
mentioned information as on record date i.e. 22nd June, 2024 as 
per the details available with the Depositories/Bank’s STA.

3. 
The Forms/Declarations can be downloaded from the website: 
www.pnbindia.in  In order to enable the Bank to determine the 
appropriate tax rate at which tax has to be deducted at source 
under the respective provisions of the Act, Shareholders are 
requested to provide/submit the documents as applicable to 
them on or before 22.06.2024 at beetalrta@gmail.com/hosd@
pnb.co.in 

4. 
The dividend will be paid after deduction of tax at source as 
determined on the basis of the documents provided by the 
respective shareholders as applicable to them and being found 
to be complete and satisfactory in accordance with the Act. 
The Bank shall arrange to dispatch the TDS certificate to the 
shareholder.

5. 
No communication on the tax determination/deduction in 
respect of the said dividend shall be entertained post the 
above mentioned date and time. It may be further noted that 

**4-	 vfuoklh 'ks;jèkkjd }kjk Lo&?kks"k.kk ds :i esa%**

----

in case the tax on said dividend is deducted at a higher rate in 
absence of receipt of the aforementioned details/documents, 
there would still be an option available with the Shareholder 
to file the return of income and claim an appropriate refund, 
if eligible. Further, it may kindly be noted that no claim shall lie 
against the Bank for such taxes deducted.

6. 
All communications/queries in this respect should be sent to 
the Bank/Bank’s STA at beetalrta@gmail.com/hosd@pnb.co.in

7. 
In the event of any income tax demand (including interest, 
penalty, etc.) arising from any misrepresentation, inaccuracy 
or omission of information provided/to be provided by the 
Shareholder(s), such Shareholder(s) will be responsible 
to indemnify the Bank and also, provide the Bank with all 
information/documents and co-operation in any proceedings.

8. 
This communication shall not be treated as an advice from the 
Bank. Shareholders should obtain tax advice related to their tax 
matters from a tax professional.

9. 
The Bank will be relying on the information verified from the 
functionality or facility available on the Income Tax website for 
ascertaining the income tax compliance for whom higher rate of 
TDS shall be applicable under section 206AB of the Act.

----

ANNUAL
REPORT

**Directors’ Report
ʁनदेशकɭ कɛ ɼरपोटर्**

----

**ih,uch ,d utj esa@PNB AT A GLANCE**

¼djksM+ esa½ (Rs Cr)

1
'ks;j iwath@Share Capital
2096
2202
2202
2202

2
vkjf{kr fufèk;k¡ ,oa vfèk'ks"k@Reserves & Surplus
88842
93285
97653
104274

3
oSf'od dkjksckj@Global Business
1845739
1931322
2165844
2353038

4
oSf'od tekjkf'k;ka@Global Deposits
1106332
1146219
1281163
1369713

5
oSf'od vfxze@Global Advances
739407
785104
884681
983325

6
fuoy vfxze@Net Advances
674230
728186
830834
934430

7
fuos'k ¼fuoy½@Investment (Net)
392983
372168
395996
420318

8
dqy vkfLr;ka@Total Assets
1260633
1314805
1461831
1561835

9
'kk[kk,a ¼la-½@Branches (No.)
10769
10098
10076
10136

10
,Vh,e usVodZ ¼la-½@ATM Network (No.)
13781
13350
12898
12131

11
dkjksckj çfrfufèk ¼la-½@Business Correspondents (No)
12518
15719
24227
33614

12
dqy deZpkjh ¼ihVh,l dks NksM+dj½& ¼la-½@ 
Total employees  (Excluding PTS)- (No)

96241
97680
97574
95789

13
ifjpkyu ykHk@Operating Profit
22159
20762
22529
24931

14
dqy çkoèkku@Total Provisions
20138
17305
20022
11737

15
fuoy ykHk@Net Profit
2022
3457
2507
8245

16
dkjksckj@deZpkjh ¼#- djksM+ esa½@Business/Employee  (Rs. Crore)
18.85
19.41
21.64
23.84

17
tekjkf'k dh oSf'od ykxr ¼%½@Global Cost of Deposit (%)
4.44
3.99
4.10
4.91

18
vfxze ij oSfÜod çfrQy ¼%½@Global Yield on Advances (%)
7.53
6.79
7.16
8.28

19
fuos'k ij oSfÜod çfrQy ¼%½@Global Yield on Investment (%)
6.48
6.29
6.57
6.78

20
oSfÜod fuoy C;kt ekftZu ¼%½@Global Net Interest Margin (%)
2.88
2.71
3.06
3.09

21
vkfLr;ksa ij çfrykHk ¼%½@Return on Assets (%)
0.15
0.26
0.18
0.54

22
bfDoVh ij çfrykHk ¼%½@Return on Equity (%)
3.88
5.96
3.94
11.66

23
vk; vuqikr dh ykxr ¼%½@Cost to Income Ratio (%)
47.82
49.38
51.69
53.37

24
ldy ,uih, ¼%½@Gross NPAs (%)
14.12
11.78
8.74
5.73

25
fuoy ,uih, ¼%½@Net NPAs (%)
5.73
4.80
2.72
0.73

26
ihlhvkj ¼%½ ¼VhMCywvks lfgr½@PCR % (including TWO)
80.1
81.6
86.9
95.4

27
iwath i;kZIrrk vuqikr ¼%½@Capital Adequacy Ratio (%)
14.32
14.50
15.50
15.97

28
fV;j 1 vuqikr ¼%½@Tier 1 Ratio (%)
11.50
11.73
12.69
13.17

----

**Global Business (Rs Lakh Crore)
Global Advances (Rs Lakh Crore)**

**Global Deposits (Rs Lakh Crore)
Global Deposits (Rs Lakh Crore)
Global Deposits (Rs Lakh Crore)**

----

44

----

**DIRECTORS’ REPORT 2023-24**

**Dear Stakeholders,**

On behalf of the entire team, I am pleased to present the Annual 
Report for the Financial Year 2023-24. This year has been the 
year of both i.e., challenges as well as opportunities and it is 
a matter of immense pride for all of us that India has emerged 
stronger than ever. 

India’s economic performance in FY 2023-24 has been truly 
remarkable. GDP growth for the FY 2023-24 increased to 8.2 
per cent which has consolidated the position of the country as 
the world’s fastest growing economy for the third consecutive 
year. The growth this year has been fueled by several factors 
such as strong domestic consumption demand, increase in 
private spending and uptick in Business confidence. 

In line with the performance of the economy, the banking 
sector also performed well during the year and could exceed 
its past performance in Business, Profitability and Capital, 
etc. Financial Year 2023-24 has been the year of growth and 
recovery for the Banking industry. The Bank could perform as 
per expectations and delivered commendable growth during 
the year, strengthening its foothold in the industry. The first 
and foremost achievement of the Bank during the Financial 
Year 2023-24 was attaining market capitalization of more than  
Rs.1 Lakh Crore and scrip price surpassing the mark of Rs.100/.  
PNB was on the second position as on 1st April, 2024 in terms of 
market capitalization amongst Public Sector Banks.

In business terms, Bank surpassed the business figure of  
Rs. 23.50 Lakh Crore recording a quantum increase of Rs. 1.87 
Lakh Crore over the previous year. The Bank has performed 
admirably in all the quarters. Global Advances recorded double 
digit growth of 11.2 per cent with Domestic Advances also 
registering the double digit growth of 10.9 per cent. As on 31st 

March, 2024, Global Deposits stood at Rs.13.70 Lakh Crore 
while Advances stood at Rs.9.83 Lakh Crore.  

Amongst Advances, Retail, Agriculture and MSME (RAM) 
Advances registered the growth of 10.7 per cent. MSME 
customers who graduated beyond MSME, were reclassified as 
corporate & others during the year and taking this reclassification 
into account, RAM advances growth would be 11.7 per cent 
Year on Year (YoY). Retail advances showed growth of 12.6 per 
cent YoY. In Retail Segment, Housing Loan, Vehicle Loan and 
Personal Loan exhibited the YoY growth of 14.5 per cent, 25.6 
per cent and 14.4 per cent respectively. 

Asset quality of the Bank improved during the year through 
adoption of robust recovery and enhanced underwriting 
standards. The Bank’s GNPA ratio declined to 5.73 per cent 
as on 31st March, 2024 from 8.74 per cent as on 31st March, 
2023. Net NPA ratio also went down to 0.73 per cent as on 
31st March, 2024 from 2.72 per cent as on 31st March, 2023.  
Provision Coverage Ratio including Technical Write Off (TWO) 
of the Bank improved to 95.4 per cent as on 31st March, 2024 
from 86.9 per cent as on 31st March, 2023. 

**funs'kd fjiksVZ 2023&24**

**fç; fgrèkkjd]**

----

On the digital front, the Bank has performed remarkably by 
coming out with more than 100 products, processes and portals. 
Some of the major products, processes and portals launched 
during the year include PNB Swagat providing Personal Loan 
to New to Bank Customers (NTB), Digi Education Loan, Digital 
Vehicle Loan, Integrated Payment & Collection Services, CMS 
Auto Debit Mandate, Digital Document Execution, etc. The 
steps taken towards digitalization could help the Bank scaling 
newer heights. 

Apart from digital thrust, development under Human Resources  
Transformation also remained at the forefront and UDAAN 
project took off smoothly covering the officers in higher grades. 

“Against this backdrop, your Board of Directors have pleasure in 
presenting the Annual Report of your Bank for the year ended 31st March, 
2024 (FY 2023-24) along with its audited Annual Financial Statements”.

**BANK’S PERFORMANCE**

I.	
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE AS ON 31st March, 2024

**1.	
Topline**

a.	
Global Business stood at Rs. 23,53,038 Crore 
vis-à-vis Rs. 21,65,844 Crore, registering YoY 
growth of 8.6 percent.

b.	
Global Deposits stood at Rs. 13,69,713 Crore as 
on 31st March, 2024 as against Rs. 12,81,163 
Crore as on 31st March 2023, showing the 
growth of 6.9 percent.

c.	
CASA Deposits was at Rs. 5,52,499 Crore as on 
31st March, 2024 as against Rs.5,38,015 Crore 
as on 31st March, 2023.

i.	
Current Deposits was at Rs. 72,201 Crore 
as on 31st March, 2024

ii.	
Savings Deposits was at Rs. 4,80,298 
Crore as on 31st March, 2024.

d.	
Global Advances stood at Rs. 9,83,325 Crore as 
on 31st March, 2024 against Rs. 8,84,681 Crore 
as on 31st March 2023, recording the growth of 
11.2 percent.

e.	
Retail Advances was at Rs. 2,22,574 Crore as 
on 31st March, 2024 registering the growth of 
12.6 per cent YoY. 

f.	
Agriculture Advances was at Rs. 1,58,188 
Crore as on 31st March, 2024 with growth of 
11.3 per cent YoY. 

g.	
MSME Advances was at Rs. 1,39,288 Crore 
as on 31st March, 2024 as against Rs.1,30,178 
Crore as on 31st March, 2023 showing the growth 
of 7.0 per cent. During the year, some MSME 

**cSad dk dk;Zfu"iknu**

**I-	
31 ekpZ] 2024 dks foÙkh; dk;Zfu"iknu**

**1- 	 'kh"kZ dk;Zfu"iknu**

**i-	
pkyw tek 31 ekpZ] 2024 dks #-72]201 djksM+ 
FkhA**

**ii-	
cpr tek 31 ekpZ 2024 dks #- 4]80]298 djksM+ 
FkhA**

----

customers graduated and got reclassified as 
Corporates. If this reclassification effect is taken 
into consideration for last year, then MSME 
Segment growth would be 12.0 per cent YoY. 

h.	
Retail Agriculture MSME (RAM) Advances was 
at Rs. 5,20,050 Crore as on 31st March, 2024 vis-
à-vis Rs.4,69,981 Crore as on 31st March, 2023, 
showing the growth of 10.7 per cent YoY. Taking 
into consideration the impact of reclassification, 
the growth of RAM would be 11.7 per cent YoY. 

i.	
Share of RAM w.r.t. Domestic Advances was at 
55.2 per cent as on 31st March, 2024.

**2.	
Bottom Line**

a.	
Net Profit of the Bank was at Rs. 8245 Crore in 
FY 2023-24 showing YoY growth of 228.8%. 

b.	
Operating Profit of the Bank was at Rs. 24,931 
Crore in FY 2023-24 showing YoY growth of 
10.7 per cent.  It stood at Rs. 22,529 Crore in FY 
2022-23

c.	
Net Interest Income was at Rs. 40,083 Crore in 
FY 2023-24 vis-à-vis Rs. 34,492 Crore in FY2022-
23, registering the growth of 16.2 per cent YoY. 

**3.	
Asset Quality**

a.	
Gross NPA of the Bank stood at Rs. 56,343 
Crore as on 31st March, 2024, improving from the 
level of Rs.77,328 Crore as on 31st March, 2023.

b.	
Gross NPA ratio exhibited decline of 301 bps 
from a level of 8.74 per cent as on 31st March, 
2023 and stood at 5.73 per cent as on 31st 

March, 2024. 

c.	
Net NPA of the Bank improved from as high 
as Rs. 22,585 Crore as on 31st March, 2023 to  
Rs. 6,799 Crore as on 31st March, 2024.

d.	
Net NPA ratio declined by 199 bps from a level 
of 2.72 per cent as on 31st March, 2023 and 
stood at 0.73 per cent as on 31st March, 2024.

e.	
Provision Coverage Ratio (PCR) including 
TWO increased by 850 bps to 95.4 per cent as 
on 31st March, 2024 as against 86.9 per cent as 
on 31st March, 2023. 

f.	
Provision Coverage Ratio (PCR) excluding 
TWO increased by 1710 bps to 87.9 per cent as 
on 31st March, 2024 as against 70.8 per cent as 
on 31st March 2023

**2- 	 c‚Ve ykbu**

**3- 	 vkfLr xq.koÙkk**

----

**4.	
Key Ratios (Global)**

a.	
Net Interest Margin improved to 3.09 per cent 
in FY 2023-24 from 3.06 per cent in FY 2022-23.

b.	
Cost of Deposits was at 4.91 per cent in FY 
2023-24 as against 4.10 per cent in FY 2022-23.

c.	
Yield on Advances increased to 8.28 per cent 
in FY 2023-24 from 7.16 per cent in FY 2022-23.

d.	
Yield on Investment increased to 6.78 per cent 
in FY 2023-24 from 6.57 per cent in FY 2022-23.

e.	
Return on Average Assets was at 0.54 per cent 
in FY 2023-24 from 0.18 per cent in FY 2022-23. 

f.	
Business per employee improved to Rs.23.84 
Crore as on 31st March, 2024 from Rs.21.64 
Crore as on 31st March, 2023.

g.	
Business per branch improved to Rs.225.25 
Crore as on 31st March, 2024 from Rs.209.53 
Crore as on 31st March, 2023.

**5.	
Capital Position**

	
The capital adequacy of the Bank improved during 
the financial year on account of capital raising by the 
Bank coupled with improved profitability. During FY 
2023-24, Bank has raised Rs.6012 Crore through 
Additional Tier I (AT I) Bonds and Rs.3090 Crore 
through Tier II Bonds. The Bank continued with its 
focus on sustainable business growth by targeting 
better rated borrowers with low risk profile. Going 
forward, the Bank is strategically well placed to meet 
the growing credit needs of the economy.

	
Key Highlights

a.	
The Capital Adequacy Ratio of the Bank recorded 
increase by 47 bps to reach at 15.97 per cent, 
as of 31st March, 2024, with AT-1 capital at 2.13 
per cent and Common Equity Tier-1 (CET-1) at 
11.04 per cent. 

b.	
Risk Weighted Assets (RWA) of the Bank were 
optimized to Rs. 7,35,435 Crore as on 31st 
March, 2024 on account of focus on better rated 
accounts and churning of portfolio of the Bank.

**6.	
Compliance Culture**

a.	
In accordance with Reserve Bank of India 
guidelines, an independent Compliance Function 
headed by Chief General Manager designated 
as Group Chief Compliance Officer (GCCO) has 
been set up in the Bank. The Board approved 
Group Compliance Policy defining various 
aspects of compliance function is in place. 

**4- 	 çeq[k vuqikr ¼oSf'od½**

**5- 	 iwathxr fLFkfr**

**çeq[k çn'kZu]**

**6- 	 vuqikyu O;ogkj%**

----

b.	
Compliance Function activities are managed 
by dedicated officials at Head Office, Zonal 
Compliance Officers at Zonal Headquarters 
and Circle Compliance Officers at Circle 
Headquarters. 

c.	
Highlights of compliance function include:

i.	
Monitoring of Compliance Risk at Bank 
level using in-house developed Compliance 
Risk Assessment Model (CRAM).

ii.	
Monitoring 
of 
compliance 
to 
Key 
Compliance 
Obligations 
(KCOs) 
by 
individual officers in the Bank using in-
house developed Compliance Monitoring 
Tool (CMT).

iii.	
Group Compliance Risk Framework along 
with Group Compliance Risk Scorecard 
has been developed to have an effective 
compliance oversight at Group level.

**II.	
OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS**

**1.	
Key Digital Initiatives & Achievements**

a.	
The Bank introduced various digital offerings 
such as Pre-Approved Business Loans (PABL), 
Digital Kisan Credit Cards through Jan Samarth 
Portal, Digi Home Loans, Digital Personal 
Loan to New To Bank (NTB) Customers (PNB-
Swagat), e-PM SVANidhi, e-GST Express, e-BG, 
digitalization of recovery process and various 
other digital experiences aimed at enhancing 
customer satisfaction & convenience.

b.	
Initiated e-OTS (Express-One Time Settlement) 
for E2E digital settlement approval process for 
NPA Accounts having o/s balance upto Rs.10 
Lakh.

c.	
Introduced Soundbox device (PNB E-Swar) at 
merchant location where Bharat QR codes are 
issued or required for digital transactions which 
provide immediate audio notification on every 
successful transaction.

d.	
An application “PNB Aarambh” was launched 
to facilitate acquiring of prospective borrowers 
customers.

e.	
Digital Gold Loan journey has also been initiated 
since November 2023. 

**2.	
Key Structural Transformations**

a.	
Customer Acquisition Centres (CACs) across 
55 locations, extending to over 80 cities have been 

**x-	 vuqikyu dk;Zç.kkyh esa 'kkfey çn'kZu%**

iii-	 lewg Lrj ij çHkkoh vuqikyu fujh{k.k ds fy, 
lewg vuqikyu tksf[ke LdksjdkMZ ds lkFk lewg 
vuqikyu tksf[ke <kapk fodflr fd;k x;k gSA 

**II-	 ifjpkyu lacaèkh çn'kZu**

**1-	 çeq[k fMftVy igysa ,oa miyfCèk;ka**

**2-	 çeq[k lajpukRed ifjorZu**

----

set up. These CACs facilitated in establishing and 
deepening relationship with customers through 
different channels and enhance marketing 
capabilities in targeted areas.

b.	
Leveraging Bank’s Subsidiary- PNBCSL 
in augmenting Retail Products marketing: 
The Bank expanded the role of PNB Cards & 
Services Limited (PNBCSL), a wholly-owned 
subsidiary, to encompass the marketing and 
distribution of the bank's retail offerings. This 
includes sourcing of Housing Loan (above Rs.10 
Lakh), Vehicle Loan (above Rs.10 Lakh) and 
Education Loan (above Rs.7.50 Lakh). Further 
PNBCSL has also been entrusted with the job of 
sourcing CASA business.

c.	
Centralized 
PNB 
Loan 
Point 
(C-PLP): 
A Centralized Processing Centre, C-PLP, 
was established to handle retail loan leads 
sourced through PNBCSL. This structure 
ensures efficient lead management and faster 
processing, resulting in sanctioning of more than 
Rs.100 Crore retail loans within a short span of 
time.

d.	
Digital 
Marketing 
Cell: 
Recognizing 
the 
untapped potential in digital marketing adoption, 
the bank has set up Digital Marketing Cell. The 
aim is to foster awareness, create adoption 
opportunities and enhancing organizational 
reputation. The digital marketing team is tasked 
with maintenance of digital assets, driving traffic, 
managing consumer sentiment and customer 
service and facilitating conversions.

3.	
Customer 
Service: 
The 
Bank 
accords 
high 
importance to Customer Service and constantly 
taking initiatives to improve it. Some of the initiatives 
taken during FY 2023-24 are as under: 

a.	
To improve the visibility of Toll-Free Numbers 
(TFNs) and to help the customers to easily 
remember the TFNs, Bank has procured two 
new 8-Digit numbers i.e. 1800 1800 and 1800 
2021.

b.	
With effect from 01.11.2023, Doorstep Banking 
is being offered through PSB Alliance at 4188 
branches of the Bank at 610 Centres.

c.	
Doorstep Banking Services (DSB) are available 
to all customers (without any age/ physical 
disability criteria) through Universal Touch 
Points (UTPs), i.e., Common mobile application, 
Common Contact Centre and web portal. The 
DSB Service booked through these UTPs will 
be delivered by an authorized agent of the 

----

outsourced agency. However, Doorstep Banking 
Services are more beneficial to senior citizens, 
differently abled or incapacitated persons and 
services to such customers is provided in an 
effective and transparent manner.

d.	
To collect the customer feedback, a SMS is 
triggered to the customer’s registered mobile 
number upon successful processing of Customer 
Induced transactions above Rs.10,000/- (cash 
deposit, withdrawal) through branch, to provide 
feedback on the quality of service rendered by 
branch officials.

e.	
23 Self-Service options are available on Contact 
Centre IVR (Interactive Voice Response). 
Functionalities like facility of Direct access to 
agent for HNI customers, Blocking of UPI, Mini 
statement over SMS and Registration of e-mail 
for account e-statement, through IVR have been 
recently started.

f.	
There is a dedicated team at Contact Centre to 
handle PNB ONE related issues and flag the 
technical issues to the back-end team.

**4.	
Project UDAAN- Revolutionizing HR capabilities 
to transform Bank**

	
HR transformation initiative, PNB UDAAN, was 
launched to enhance HR functions and processes. 
This project comprises of various modules and 
includes establishment of a Human Resource 
Transformation (HRT) cell. Under the UDAAN project, 
PNB embarked on a digital HR transformation 
journey, achieving the following:

a.	
Foundational Enhancements: Introduction of 
end-to-end Digital Performance Management 
Systems, role clarity, scientific target setting, 
differentiation of performance scores among 
employees, and implementation of new systems 
& policies such as Job Families, Succession 
planning, 360-degree feedback, etc.

b.	
Process Digitization: Digitization of critical 
processes such as manpower assessment, 
job role allocation, objective and system-
driven performance management, and the 
implementation of analytics-based dashboards 
for performance enhancement & robust business 
reviews.

c.	
Unleashing Potential: Maximizing the potential 
of each employee through a comprehensive 
learning and development program. This includes 
various capability-building measures such as 

**4-	 ifj;kstuk mM+ku& cSad ds :ikarj.k ds fy, ekuo 
lalkèku {kerkvksa esa Økafr ykuk**

----

redesigning job families for specialization, career 
paths, succession planning, talent management, 
individual development and grooming plan 
including One-on-One coaching.

	
Project UDAAN is not only about digital processes 
but also brings with it a major aspect of capability 
development. A  best-in-class Leadership Development 
Program was conducted and under it, more than 900 
senior level managers were imparted leadership 
training. PNB’s flagship LDP is in 3 forums – Leading 
Self, Leading Team & Leading Transformation. Each 
forum consists of 2 day classroom training & 90 
minutes One-on-One coaching. 

	
Looking at the success of UDAAN 1.0, the Bank is set 
to take this transformation journey to the next level 
with UDAAN 2.0. 

**5.	
DIVIDEND**

	
Board of Directors of the Bank has recommended a 
dividend of Rs.1.50 per equity share (75 per cent) of 
face value of Rs.2/- each for FY 2023-24, subject to 
declaration/approval of the shareholders at the 23rd 

Annual General Meeting of the Bank. 

**III.	
ASSET QUALITY**

	
The Bank was able to reduce Gross NPA from the level 

of Rs. 77,328 Crore as on 31st March, 2023 to Rs. 56,343 

Crore as on 31st March, 2024. Net NPA of the Bank came 

down to the level of Rs. 6,799 Crore as on 31st March, 2024 

from Rs. 22,585 Crore as on 31st March, 2023. Focus on 

asset quality continues to be one of the topmost priorities for 

the Bank. Provision Coverage Ratio (PCR) including TWO 

is at a healthy level of 95.4 per cent as on 31st March, 2024.

1.	
Recovery & Upgradation: Total Recovery stood at 
Rs. 20,164 Crore for FY 2023-24. Of this, total Cash 
Recovery (Cash Recovery+ Recovery in Technical 
Write Off (TWO)+ Recorded Interest (RI)) stood at 
Rs.16,716 Crore for FY 2023-24. 

2.	
Upgradation through Resolution Mechanism: 
The Resolution Cell was created to deal exclusively 
with restructuring/resolution of NPA accounts and 
recovery in National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) 
cases. The details regarding the same is as under: 

**Restructured Accounts (Amount Rs. in Crore)**

**Total Sanctioned**

**No. of A/c’s 
Amount**

FY 2023-24
06
3688

**5- 	 ykHkka'k**

**III-	 vkfLr xq.koÙkk**

**iquxZfBr [kkrs  ¼jkf'k djksM+ #i;s esa½**

**dqy Loh—r
[kkrksa dh la[;k 
jkf'k
foÙk o"kZ 2023&24
06
3688**

----

     Further, a sum of Rs.3603 Crore was recovered in NPA 
accounts under IBC in NCLT. 

3.	
Mega e-Auctions: During FY 2023-24, 11,502 
properties were uploaded on e-Bikray portal. Out of 
which, 2081 Immovable Properties (IPs) were auctioned 
successfully. 

4.	
Sale of Assets to Asset Reconstruction Company 
(ARC)/NARCL: Details of financial assets sold to 
ARCs/NARCL is as under: 

(Amount Rs. in Crore)

**Items
FY 2023-24**

i.
Number of Accounts sold to ARCs
20

ii.
Book Outstanding of Accounts sold
4929

iii.
Aggregate Consideration received
1248

**5.	
Initiatives taken to Improve Asset Quality during 
FY 2023-24**

**a.	
War against NPA campaign**

i.	
Dedicated tele-calling campaigns and 
rigorous field visits to NPA borrowers.

ii.	
Head Office provided its full support and 
involvement for targeted recovery actions.

**b.	
Digitization of recovery efforts**

i.	
Launch of re-vamped digital One Time 
Settlement (OTS) (e-OTS) offering for NPA 
recovery for eligible a/cs upto Rs 10 Lakh. 

ii.	
Recovery portal – SAMARTH, 11 out of 17 
modules were made live during FY 2023-24.

**c.	
Digital e-OTS journey for robust recovery**

i.	
e-OTS is a digital OTS approval process on 
filtered NPA Accounts having outstanding 
amount up to Rs.10 Lakh, in which all the 
steps from applying for OTS to sanctioning 
of OTS & steps involved thereafter are 
automated. The solution has been rolled 
out through PNB official website & PNB 
ONE App.

ii.	
PNB is the first Bank to launch such kind 
of an online automated OTS approval 
process.

iii.	
To enhance the outreach of available 
Special One Time Settlement Scheme 
(SOTS) and to target small NPA Accounts, 
e-OTS can prove to be a very effective tool 
in the recovery process.

**ensa
foÙkh; o"kZ 2023&24**

i-
,vkjlh dks csps x, [kkrksa dh la[;k
20

ii-
csps x, [kkrksa dh cdk;k cgh
4929

iii-
dqy çkIr çfrQy
1248

**,-	 ,uih, ds fo#) ;q) Lrj ij vfHk;ku**

**ch- 	olwyh ds ç;klksa dk fMftVyhdj.k**

**lh- 	l'kä olwyh ds fy, fMftVy bZ&vksVh,l çfØ;k**

ii-	
ih,uch bl rjg dh v‚uykbu Lopkfyr 
vksVh,l vuqeksnu çfØ;k 'kq: djus okyk igyk 
cSad gSA

----

iv.	
Settlement approval process shall be 
expedited for small loan NPA accounts 
and OTS approval TAT will get reduced 
substantially.

v.	
The recovery generated through this 
process, will have a positive impact on the 
overall profitability of the Bank, especially 
in DB3 and Loss accounts.

vi.	
Convenience to eligible NPA Account 
borrowers under e-OTS process, Sanction 
Letter and No Dues Certificate shall be 
generated online.

**IV.	 EXPANDING DIGITAL FOOTPRINTS**

	
Technology continues to drive the Banking sector and 
with the advent of Fintech in the banking landscape, it 
has become all the more critical to adopt and imbibe 
technology in the Bank’s day to day operations effectively 
to remain competitive and grow.  

S.No.
Parameters (in Crore)
As on  
31.03.23
As on 
31.03.24

Gr% (YoY) 
31.03.24/ 
31.03.23

1
No. of Internet banking Users 
3.92
4.23
7.9%

2
PNB One Activated users
1.16
1.74
50.0%

S.No.
Parameters (in Crore)
FY 2022-23 FY 2023-24
 

1
No of digital transactions
408
659
61.5%

2
UPI transactions
364
622
70.9%

	
The Bank, during FY 2023-24, took up various digital 
initiatives towards business growth and customer 
convenience: 

**LIABILITY**

1.	
Online Locker Agreement Execution: A facility is 
provided to customers for execution of locker agreement 
online. This involves integration with NeSL for e-stamping.

2.	
DIGILOCKER: API Integration for Digi Locker through 
which the customer can fetch the account statement by 
providing the necessary inputs like Account Number, 
Period, Customer Name, etc. The account statement can 
also be downloaded in PDF format.

3.	
Positive Pay System through PNB Website: Positive 
Pay System through PNB Website has been implemented 
to get confirmation from customers for clearing of cheques 
amounting to Rs. 50,000 and above.

4.	
e-Mandate as Sponsor Bank Integration: To register 
e-Mandate as a sponsor Bank, our bank is participating 
in the National Automated Clearing House (NACH). Bank 
and its Corporates are accepting NACH Mandate, which 
is a direction of a customer to honour  recurring payments 

**II- 	 fMftVy Q+qVfçaV dk foLrkj**

**ns;rk%**

----

like insurance, loan installment, Systematic Investment 

Plan (SIP), etc.

5.	
Implementation of Japan Credit Bureau (JCB) 
Contactless cards- q SPARC:  In order to facilitate 
contactless feature in domestic and international locations, 
NPCI has enhanced their contactless product specification 
known as RuPay Contactless Product (q-SPARC) and 
requested the Bank to enable this feature on JCB card so 
that JCB card holder can enjoy the seamless tap and pay 
feature in their JCB card.

6.	
E-Mandate Registration and Transaction Processing 
as Sponsor Bank: Feature of Self E-Mandate registration 
by customers for their PNB loan Accounts through Bank’s 
Website with authentication as Debit Card, Internet 
banking and Aadhaar.

7.	
RBI Unclaimed Deposit API integration: API integration 
with the RBI UDGAM portal has been implemented to 
facilitate the customers for centralized search of unclaimed 
deposits/inoperative accounts.

9.	
Online BG Verification Portal: This portal is used as a 
medium through which the beneficiaries can validate the 
genuineness of Bank Guarantee.

10.	 PNB Secure Savings Account (SSA): PNB Secure 
Savings Account is a product which offers insurance 
with savings account. This has been achieved through 
integration with PNB Metlife through e-Insurance portal for 
insurance policy generation.

**RETAIL**

1.	
Digital Housing Loan: Under Digital Housing Loan, 
CBS system has been integrated with onlinepsbloans 
(OPL), Fintech partner, through middleware developed in-
house. It provides housing loan through end-to-end digital 
journey to customers who may or may not have customer 
relationship with our bank.

2.	
New to Bank Personal Loan (NTBPL): New to Bank 
Personal Loan is end-to-end digital product. It provides 
personal loan through end-to-end digital journey to 
customers who are not registered with bank or not having 
any customer relationship with the Bank.

**fjVsy**

----

3.	
Digi Vehicle Loan API Integration: APIs for the Self-
Initiated Customer journey in which the customer will initiate 
the journey through different alternate channels- IBS/PNB 
ONE, PNB website (URL designed specifically for these 
products) for purchasing the vehicle for private use.

**AGRICULTURE**

1.	
Digital Journey of PNB Krishi Tatkal Rin Yojana: End to 

end Digital Journey for PNB Kisan Tatkal Rin Yojana to give 

hassle free digital experience to small farmer borrowers.

2.	
Digital Kisan Credit Card (KCC) journey through 
Jansamarth Portal: Bank’s customers can avail KCC 
loan up to Rs.1.60 Lakh through Jansamarth Portal.

3.	
KCC Review and Drawing Power (DP) Enhancement: 
PNB is offering to its existing KCC borrowers to review 
and enhance (Annual DP) their KCC accounts through the 
digital portal. It is the customer initiated Straight Through 
Processing (STP) Digital Journey for which Bank has 
provided APIs in where review date and DP enhancement 
will be marked for eligible borrowers.

**MSME**

1.	
Pre-Approved Business Loan (PABL): PABL is launched 
to offer straight through digital lending business loan 
facilities above Rs. 1.00 Lakh  to Rs. 10.00 Lakh.

2.	
Easy renewal up to Rs.10.00 Lakh: End to end digital 
renewal will be done for all eligible borrowers having 
exposure upto Rs.10.00 Lakh.

3.	
Digital Journey of App Based GST Sahay Scheme: To 
provide hassle free loan up to Rs.2.00 Lakh per invoice 
to GST registered MSMEs engaged in manufacturing, 
trading and services against GST invoices at competitive 
rates subject to maximum of Rs. 10.00 Lakh per borrower.

4.	
Digital Journey of PNB GST Express Loan: To boost 
digital lending, e-GST EXPRESS scheme has been 
launched for loan above Rs.10.00 Lakh to Rs.100.00 Lakh 
with minimum manual intervention for Existing to Bank 
(ETB) customers only.

**FINANCIAL INCLUSION**

1.	
Jansuraksha: API integration with Department of 
Financial Services (DFS) Jan Suraksha portal to automate 

**—f"k**

**,e,l,ebZ**

**foÙkh; lekos'ku%**

----

the process of enrolment and claim settlement of Pradhan 
Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY) and Pradhan 
Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY) from BC location 
through Internet Banking Services (IBS)/Mobile Banking 
Services (MBS) and from branch.

**GOVERNMENT BUSINESS**

1.	
Accepting online credit to Public Provident Fund (PPF) 
& Sukanya Samriddhi Account(SSA) for Bank’s own 
customers and for other than account holder through 
Mobile Banking Services (MBS).

2.	
Bhavishya API Integration for Pension Slip, Life Certificate 
Status, Form 16 and Due Drawn Arrear present in 
Government Business Software Solution (GBSS) server to 
Bhavishya portal.

**CUSTOMER SERVICE**

1.	
Centralized Grievance Redressal Monitoring System 
(CGRMS) API (complaint Re-Opening): Re-opening 
of digital and non-digital complaint in CGRMS as per 
customer request. The facility of reopening of complaint 
with same docket number is developed.

**MOBILE BANKING (PNB ONE) & INTERNET BANKING**

1.	
QR Code Generation through PNB ONE and Retail 
Internet Banking: Customers can now display QR 
Code to receive payments instantly through UPI. The QR 
Code can also be downloaded and shared for receiving 
payments.

2.	
PNB SHOPPE (E-market place) in PNB ONE and 
Internet Banking: Bank introduced PNB Shoppe in PNB 
One and Internet Banking. PNB Account holders will now 
be able to earn extra rewards for their day to day shopping 
needs.

3.	
OTP on E-mail registration facility in PNB ONE: To 
facilitate our customers, it has been decided to provide 
OTP on e-mail facility for users of PNB One.

4.	
Bulk fund transfer facility in PNB ONE: Earlier in PNB 
ONE, funds could only be transferred to single beneficiary 
at a time. Now, for enhanced user experience and faster 
payments, Bulk Fund Transfer facility has been introduced 
in PNB ONE.

5.	
Onboarding on Retail Internet Banking using Aadhaar 
OTP: Online Self-registration and Password Reset facility 
using Aadhaar OTP has been introduced.

6.	
UPI payment using RUPAY credit card in PNB ONE: 
Functionality of UPI payment through PNB ONE using 
Rupay credit card has been started.

7.	
Waiver of OTP authentication for fund transaction Intra 
bank (within PNB) & Interbank, i.e., NEFT & IMPS and UPI 
transactions amount upto Rs.5000/- through PNB ONE.

**ljdkjh dkjksckj**

**xzkgd lsok**

----

**WHATSAPP BANKING**

1.	
The Bank is offering more than 40 services through 
WhatsApp Banking. Current Account holders, including 
those in Retail and Corporate categories, can now also 
utilize WhatsApp Banking with a new functionality to 
disable IBS/MBS. 

2.	
The facility of block debit cards on a temporary or 
permanent basis, register for e-statements and "Block 
UPI" feature to enhance security has been introduced.

**UNIFIED PAYMENT INTERFACE (UPI)**

1.	
UPI registration for NRO accounts: Facility of UPI 
has been extended to Non-Resident Ordinary (NRO) 
customers as well, thereby making it more accessible and 
convenient for them to make domestic payments in India.

2.	
UPI 123PAY: UPI 123PAY is an instant payment system 
for feature phone users in a safe and secure manner 
without internet connectivity. Through UPI 123PAY, feature 
phone users will now be able to undertake a host of UPI 
transactions through pre-defined IVR number.

3.	
Linking of RUPAY credit card on UPI: Customers can 
use their RuPay Credit card for making payments to 
merchant through UPI. For this, customer has to link his 
card to BHIM PNB App or any enabled UPI App.

4.	
Interoperable Card-less Cash Withdrawal using UPI 
(ICCW): ICCW is a facility which enables a customer to 
withdraw cash from ATM by using UPI platform. There is no 
need to carry and remember card details. Cash withdrawal 
by scanning QR code through any ICCW enabled UPI app 
is now possible. 

5.	
UPI INTERNATIONAL: To promote UPI payment platform 
globally, National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI) 
has introduced the functionality, UPI International (UPI 
Global) for Foreign Outward Remittance. The functionality 
can be used by customers visiting abroad who want to 
make payments to local merchants.

6.	
UPI Lite: Customers can make small payments of up to 
Rs.500 using on-device wallet.

**V.	
ANALYTICS CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (ACoE)**

	
“Analytics Centre of Excellence” is a dedicated vertical 
responsible for developing all kind of reports, data 
reporting, providing Management Information System 
(MIS) support to other business verticals  and developing 
AI/ML based solution for Bank. Besides these, ACoE is also 
responsible for maintaining the CIC Module (Bureau One), 
CIC Data submission, Central Registry of Securitisation 
Asset Reconstruction and Security Interest of India 
(CERSAI), NeSL, Data aggregator/Account Aggregator, 
PNB 360 application dashboard and enterprise wide data 
warehouse.

**OgkV~l,i cSafdax**

**,dh—r Hkqxrku baVjQ+sl ¼UPI½**

**V-	 mR—"Vrk fo'ysf"kdh dsaæ ¼ACoE½**

----

1.	
Enterprise-Wide Data Warehouse (EDW): Bank 
has operational enterprise data warehouse project 
catering to various analytical/statutory/regulatory 
and reporting/dash-boarding requirement with data 
from 60 plus source systems being integrated into 
EDW. All downstream applications are receiving 
data through EDW and also all data requirements for 
various digital journeys are catered to.

2.	
Data Analytics Team: Data Analytics cell at ACoE 
was conceptualized to develop in house capability 
in the field of Artificial intelligence. Since then 
the cell is actively engaged in analysis which is 
broadly categorized in three broad verticals namely 
Business, Control and Support. These verticals have 
been identified with the objective of value-creation, 
increasing cross-sell, up-sell opportunity, increasing 
revenue, cost reduction, product enhancement, 
channel optimization, maximizing digital footprint, 
plugging revenue leakage and improved risk profiling 
of the existing as well as prospective customer base.

	
Analytics based leads are generated for potential 
customers who have higher propensity to use bank 
products as compared to other customers. Leads are 
identified after analyzing various parameters such as 
customer behavior with reference to their demographic 
details, investment profile, relationship with bank, 
transactional data, geographical distribution, digital 
presence, bank products usage etc.

	
Since inception, Data analytics team has been working 
to comply with various analytics related action points 
pertaining to EASE (3.0 to 6.0). In EASE journey of 
the Bank, there has been continuous improvement in 
Bank’s position pertaining to analytics.

	
Going forward, apart from business generation, major 
focus will be on process improvement, digitalization, 
detecting revenue leakage and improvement in asset 
quality and onboarding new customers. 

**3.	
New Initiatives**

a.	
Usage of unstructured data: In order to explore the 
capabilities of conversion of unstructured data into 
structured one, below mentioned use cases have been 
developed in house with available tools on pilot basis. 

i.	
Use of Social media interaction and feedback for 
sentiment analysis, product enrichment.

ii.	
Extraction of key information embedded in PDF 
like balance sheet.

b.	
Optimization of Cash Retention Limit (CRL) for 
Bulk Note Acceptor (BNA) and ATM- Time series 
analytical approach has been used to derive the cash 
retention limit for ATM/BNA so as to reduce overall 
cash requirement of the bank. 

**3-	 ubZ igy**

----

c.	
Procurement and Deployment of full stack 
analytical tool – Bank has procured and deployed 
IBM Cloud Pak for Data, a full stack analytical tool/ 
platform for carrying out Artificial Intelligence (AI) /
Machine Learning (ML) studies. 

d.	
Statement analyzer & spend analyzer- The 
team has developed the analyzer to have better 
understanding of customer spending and earning 
behavior to supplement credit decision for individual 
customers.

**4.	
Other Key Highlights**

a.	
Account Aggregator (AA) Ecosystem: PNB is 
live with 11 Account Aggregators as both Financial 
Information Provider (FIP) and Financial Information 
User (FIU). Both FIP and FIU modules are live since 
11-07-2022 and Bank has already started sharing 
data with other banks as FIP. As on date following 
Digital Journeys have been made live with PNB AA 
such as Digital Home Loan (DIGI HL), New to Bank 
Personal Loan (NTB PL), Digital Car Loan (DIGI CL), 
PNB ONE, Lens. Implementation of AA ecosystem for 
9 RRBs of PNB has been completed on 31.10.2023. 

b.	
Data 
Aggregation 
and 
Analytical 
Services 
(DAAS): PNB Data Aggregator facilitates to provide 
data from various public domain sources as well 
as analyze financial statements of companies and 
individuals. PNB Data Aggregation & Analytics 
Services (DAAS) Application not only draws raw data 
from multiple sources but also analyzes the data and 
provides information to enable users to take real time 
decisions.

	
Current Account Opening using video KYC, Housing 
loan, NTB PL (new to bank personal loan), Tab 
banking, SASTRA portal, Digital Vehicle Loan using 
DAAS APIs from Income Tax Return (ITR), Import 
Export Code (IEC) & Udyam registration, Bank 
statement Analysis, IEC, Vehicle data verification, 
BSA, Employees' Provident Fund Organization 
(EPFO), 26AA are the services has been made live. 

c.	
Next Level Reforms: With EDW in place, Bank is 
well prepared to achieve the action points under next 
level reforms in PSBs for short term and long-term 
targets like digital transformation & enhancement, 
Big Data Analytics, change in banking technology, 
focused use of Fin-Tech and improvement in 
employee engagement through analytics.  

d.	
PNB 360 and Customer 360 Dashboard: ACoE 
has developed in house Dashboard “PNB 360” 
for Business Monitoring to set short-term & long-

**4-	 vU; eq[; fo'ks"krk,¡%**

----

term goals. It improves the speed and efficiency of 
accessing different data sets and makes it easier 
for decision-makers to derive insights that guides 
the business and marketing strategies. Dashboard 
graphical view helps the management to quickly 
review the outcomes of initiatives launched and then 
adjust the strategy to decrease cost and maximize 
efficiency.

	
Customer 360 is a dedicated dashboard for high value 
customers in line with PNB 360 with only view rights. 
Currently available for Central/State Government 
institutions/department PUS and SNA accounts. 
Customer is also given functionality to download 
reports in PDF/Excel format. Dashboard will provide 
graphical and pictorial representation of position 
of fund, movement of funds, Interest earned by 
customer, TDS deducted, Interest paid, no of facilities 
availed, Y-o-Y Comparison, Variation from last quarter, 
Variation from last Financial Year on T+1 basis etc.

**VI.	 BRANCH NETWORK**

1.	
Domestic: As on 31st March 2024, the number of 
branches was at 10,136. The population-group wise 
branches along-with the percentage share are given 
as under: 

2.	
International: As on 31st March, 2024, Bank has 
presence in 6 countries by way of 1 branch at Dubai 
(another 1 branch at GIFT City Gujarat also caters to 
the international business of the bank), 2 subsidiaries 
(London-UK and Bhutan), 1 joint venture (Nepal), 2 
representative offices (Myanmar and Bangladesh).

**VII.	 INTERNATIONAL BANKING**

	
As on 31st March, 2024, the Bank has 255 branches 
authorized to handle Foreign Exchange Business which 
are routing forex transactions through 4 Trade Finance 
Centers (TFCs) functioning at New Delhi, Chennai, Kolkata 
& Mumbai. TFCs are specialized for centralized handling 
of trade transactions and International Service branch is 
specialized for handling all Inward remittances.

**VI-	 'kk[kk usVodZ**

**VII-	 varjkZ"Vªh; cSafdax**

----

	
The Bank has 1 Exchange Bureau at Indira Gandhi 
International Airport to facilitate encashment of foreign 
exchange currency notes by foreign tourists/ Non Resident 
Indians (NRIs).

**1.	
DOMESTIC BUSINESS**

	
The Bank registered a Foreign Exchange Business 
Turnover of Rs.1,34,868 Crore (Exports and Imports 
together) for the FY 2023-24.

	
Bank has an International Service Branch (ISB) 
functioning at New Delhi for handling Inward 
Remittances of the Bank as a whole. During FY 2023-
24, Bank handled remittance business of Rs.80,893 
Crore.

	
The Bank has Rupee Drawing Arrangements (RDA) 
with 8 exchange houses (5 in the Gulf, 1 each in 
Singapore, UK and Seychelles) to facilitate remittance 
from NRIs.

	
The Bank also has remittance arrangement under 
Money Transfer Service Scheme (MTSS) with 
Transfast Financial Services Pvt. Ltd. and Ria Money 
transfer services Pvt. Ltd.

	
There is a specialized NRI cell for augmenting NRI 
Business, monitoring of complaints and Help Desk for 
NRI customers.  

**2.	
OVERSEAS BUSINESS**

	
Overseas business of the Bank stood at Rs. 77,282 
Crore as on 31st March, 2024 registering YOY growth 
of 20.1 per cent. Bank has two international branches 
at DIFC Dubai & GIFT City Gandhinagar. Overseas 
branches are focusing on High Quality Medium/ Long 
term Assets to build a diversified loan portfolio with 
low Credit Risk Weight to improve profitability.

	
Both international branches of the Bank are offering 
External Commercial Borrowing (ECB), Foreign 
Currency Term Loan (FCTL) and Trade Finance 
Products to Indian and overseas customers. 

3.	
NEW INITIATIVES  

a.	
Launch of new scheme for exporters: A new 
export credit scheme-Export Express for MSME 
customers was launched with competetive rate 
of interest, service charges & exchange margin.

b.	
The Bank has also opened two Special Rupee 
Vostro Acount (SRVA) accounts.

c.	
Multicurrency World Travel Card: The product 
has a unique feature of multiple currencies 
loaded in a single card. Bank is offering the 
cards in 6 foreign currencies.

**1-	 ?kjsyw O;olk;**

**2-	 fons'kh O;kikj**

**3-	 ubZ igy**

----

d.	
Trade Finance portal for Trade Finance 
Products: Exporter and Importer can submit 
online all types of trade finance request through 
the portal

e.	
Outward Remittance Facility for Resident 
Individuals through IBS & MBS: The Bank 
has launched Outward Remittance Facility for 
resident individuals for remitting funds under 
Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS) through 
Mobile Banking. 

f.	
50 branches have been identified as NRI service 
branches to increase our NRI portfolio.

**VIII.	BUSINESS DIVERSIFICATION**

	
Insurance Business

1.	
Life Insurance: The Bank solicits Life Insurance 
Business under Corporate Agency Agreement with 
the following Life Insurance companies:

a.	
PNB MetLife India Insurance Co. Ltd (PMLI)

b.	
Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC)

2.	
Non-Life Insurance: Bank solicits Non-Life Insurance 
Business under Corporate Agency Agreement with 
insurance companies such as The Oriental Insurance 
Co. Ltd. (OICL), Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Co. 
Ltd. (BAGIC), Cholamandalam MS General Insurance 
Co. Ltd. (CHOLA MS), Care Health Insurance Ltd. 
(CHIL) and Star Health & Allied Insurance Co. Ltd. 
(SHICL).

	
The Bank’s commission income from insurance 
business (both life & non-life) stood at Rs.448 Crore 
during FY’2023-24. 

3.	
Mutual Funds: Bank is a distributor of Mutual Fund 
products of the Asset Management Companies 
namely Sundaram Asset Management Company 
Limited, Nippon Life Asset Management Limited, 
UTI Asset Management Company Limited, Aditya 
Birla Sunlife Asset Management Company Limited, 
LIC Mutual Fund Asset Management Limited, DSP 
Investment Managers Private Limited and Franklin 
Templeton Asset Management (India) Private Limited.

	
Bank has also tie-up with M/s Finwizard Technology 
Private Limited (FISDOM) for providing online Mutual 
Fund investment and robo-advisory services to all its 
customer. FISDOM is providing commission to the 
bank on revenue sharing basis.

	
During FY2023-24, income of Rs.8.60 Crore was 
earned from Mutual Fund business with a YoY growth 
of 4.11 percent.

**VIII-	dkjksckj fofoèkhdj.k**

**chek O;olk;**

**,-	
ih,uch esVykbQ bafM;k ba';ksjsal daiuh fyfeVsM 
¼ih,e,yvkbZ½**

**ch-	 Hkkjrh; thou chek fuxe ¼,yvkbZlh½**

----

4.	
Depository Services: As a Depository Participant, 
Bank opened 18,334 Demat Accounts during FY 
2023-24 against 15,314 in FY 2022-23 with a YoY 
growth of 19.72 per cent and 24,108 Online Trading 
Accounts in FY 2023-24 against 18,538 in FY 2022-

23 with YoY growth of 30.05 per cent.

	
Income earned in FY 2023-24 from Depository 

services was Rs.7.08 Crore against Rs.6.26 Crore in 
FY 2022-23. 

5.	
Application Supported by Blocked Amount 
(ASBA) & Merchant Banking: The Bank has license 
to act as Banker to Issue, Debenture Trustee and 
Merchant Banker. During FY 2023-24, 427 number of 
issues were handled as against 297 in FY 2022-23.

	
The amount blocked through ASBA was Rs. 45,716 
Crore in FY 2023-24 against  Rs 8,211 Crore in FY 
2022-23.  

6.	
Government Business Vertical Centers (GBV): 
21 GBVs have sourced total new 7,300 Government 
Accounts; 84,488 new Savings Accounts out of which 
10,301 Salary Accounts and 1,415 Rakshak Plus 
Accounts along with other Saving Accounts were 
mobilized during the FY 2023-24.

	
GBVs have also canvassed Retail Loans of Rs. 852 
Crore and Loans & Advances to Govt. departments of 
Rs.25,361 Crore were sanctioned.

**7.	
New Initiatives**

a.	
Insurance Business: The Bank launched 
product Raahat by Bajaj Allianz General 
Insurance Co. Ltd. which is a customized 
Personal Accident Policy for PNB customers 
for sum insured Rs.6.00 Lakh/Rs.4.00 Lakh 
with 9 annual preventive health check-ups and 
unlimited Tele-consultation are available at a 
premium of Rs.155/Rs.125.

b.	
Mutual Fund Business: During FY 2023-
24, Bank has introduced online mutual fund 
investment and robo-advisory services for all 
its customers through PNB ONE and Internet 
Banking, in association with M/s Finwizard 
Technology Pvt Ltd (FISDOM).

c.	
Depository 
& 
ASBA 
Business-Discount 
brokerage: The Bank, in coordination with M/s 
SMC Global Securities Limited, has introduced 
discount brokerage facility, which is very popular 
in the present trading market. It offers Zero 
Brokerage for delivery and flat Rs.15 for Intra-
day trading. 

**7-	 ubZ igy**

----

**d.	
Government Business Vertical**

i.	
Public Fund Management System (PFMS) 
Business: A separate scheme launched 
for Single Nodal Agency Accounts (SNA)/ 
Corporate Nodal Agency (CNA) accounts 
with customization to offer features catering 
to Government bodies and institutes. Some 
of these features include non-deduction of 
charges, sweep facility, MIS, and linking to 
PFMS External System.

ii.	
Defence Business: Defence Business 
Cell (DBC) is established for strengthening 
PNB’s banking business with Indian Armed 
forces, Paramilitary and Police forces. 
During FY 2023-24, the Bank’s business 
from Defence Vertical are as hereunder:

	•
Number of Defence salary/pension 
accounts under Bank’s Rakshak plus 
scheme grew 6.33 per cent YoY.

	•
In real terms the value of business 
(Deposit+ 
Advance) 
under 
the 
Rakshak Plus (Salary/ Pension) grew 
by 28 percent YoY.

**IX.	 GOVERNMENT BUSINESS**

	
With a view to play a more proactive role in the transfer 
of funds from Centre and States to various beneficiaries, 
the Bank has an exclusive Government Business 
Division which is responsible for Pension, Processing & 
Disbursement, small savings schemes of the Government, 
Direct & Indirect Taxes Collections and Currency Chest 
Management. The Bank is also accredited banker to 
nine different Central government departments post 
amalgamation. These numbers will further rise. The 
Bank has been increasing tie-ups with various State 
governments to cater to their specific needs.

	
Key Initiatives taken up under Government Business 
are as under:  

1.	
The Bank is disbursing pension of approximately 6.5 
lakh pensioners i.e. Central Government, Defense, 
Railways, Telecom and State Government

2.	
More than 3 lakh pensioners availed the Digital Life 
certificate service to submit their Life certificate. This 
includes biometric authentication as well as face 
authentication.

3.	
TIN2.0: We are one of the first few banks to go live 
on the new TIN 2.0 platform of Central Board of Direct 
Taxes (CBDT) from 1st December, 2022. Direct Taxes 
can be paid on the website https://eportal.incometax.
gov.in through Internet Banking, Debit Card and Over 
the Counter (Cheque/DD/Cash)

**Mh- 	ljdkjh O;olk; oVÊdy%**

III-	 ljdkjh dkjksckj

----

4.	
The Bank is integrated with the new Central Board 
of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) e-payment 
platform - Electronic Cash Ledger (ECL) of Indian 
Customs Electronic Data Interchange Gateway 
(ICEGATE), through Internet Banking. It was made 
live on 1st April, 2023.

5.	
Old Government Business Solution Software (GBSS) 
upgraded to new GBSS system. The new GBSS is 
robust enough to handle large volume of data for 
pension processing.

6.	
FASTAG: The Bank is providing FASTAG issuance 
service also to our customers through ONLINE mode 
and OFFLINE mode (through all branches)

7.	
National Pension System (NPS): All the Branches 
of the Bank are enabled for NPS transactions. Online 
facilities for NPS Registration and Contribution is also 
available through our website (https://www.pnbindia.
in/nps.html) as well as PNB ONE App. Total number 
of NPS subscribers associated with the Bank as on 
31st March, 2024 is 1,16,825. The Bank provides NPS 
facilities to 27 corporates under Corporate Model.

9.	
Public Financial Management System (PFMS): 
The Bank has timely disbursed funds of approximately 
Rs.3893 Crore to about 1.94 Lakh beneficiaries under 
PM Kisan Samman Nidhi. 

10.	 Through active marketing more than 64,635 PPF, 
68,585 Sukanya Samriddhi Accounts and 91,677 
Senior Citizen Saving Accounts were opened during 
FY 2023-24. 

11.	 The Bank has implemented new scheme Mahila 
Samman Savings Certificate 2023 (MSSC 2023) and 
opened 5665 accounts as on 31st March, 2024.

12.	 The Bank is also in process of providing facility of 
Online Public Provident Fund (PPF) account opening.

13.	 The facility to deposit in SSA (Sukanya Samriddhi 
Account) and PPF (Public Provident Fund) through 
NEFT from other Bank third party account has been 
implemented.

14.	 Four Series of Sovereign Gold Bond subscription 
launched by Government of India were marketed by 
our branches and 1141 Kgs were sold. 

15.	 The Bank is having integration with various states 
and collecting online and offline taxes through their 
Cyber Treasury Portal and collection of VAT is being 
done in 19 States.

----

16.	 The Bank is one of the major collectors of taxes for 
Central & State Government.

**X.	
TREASURY OPERATIONS**

	
The Bank’s Gross Domestic Investments stood at  
Rs. 4,23,305 Crore as on 31st March, 2024 registering YoY 
growth of 5.9% with trading profit at Rs.1,354 Crore.

**1.	
Overview of System liquidity**

	
System liquidity, on average, remained in surplus 
during first half of FY 2023-24. However, it 
subsequently turned deficit over the course of next 
three months and peaked in January 2024. The 
situation improved with the liquidity deficit moderating 
to some extent during February - March 2024. 
Reserve Bank of India remained agile in its liquidity 
management through main and fine-tuning operations 
in both repo and reverse repo throughout the year. 
Incremental Cash Reserve Ratio (I-CRR) was also 
introduced as a temporary measure to control excess 
liquidity in the system due to the return of ₹2,000 
notes.

**2.	
Fixed Income (SLR/NSLR)**

	
10 year benchmark yield sequentially glided downwards 
by 35 bps from 7.40 level as on 31st March, 2023 to 
7.05 level as on 31st March, 2024. The softening was 
partly attributable to expectation of increased inflows 
over the next 12-18 months from inclusion of Govt. 
securities in JP Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index 
and Bloomberg Emerging Market Local Currency 
Index. In addition, easing inflation in the last quarter 
of FY 2023-24 fuelled market’s expectation of Fed 
rate cuts, however, expectations have moderated from 
erstwhile six rate cuts in Calendar Year 2024 to utmost 
two on account of favourable data points despite 
elevated interest rate levels.   

	
Reserve Bank of India also maintained the repo rate at 
6.50% during FY 2023-24 after raising it by 250 basis 
points the previous year i.e. FY 2022-23. Smaller 
than expected domestic bond borrowing program for 
FY 2024-25 and pick up in foreign demand after bond 
index inclusion announcement also contributed to 
softening of yields.

**3.	
Equity & Mutual Funds**

	
FY 2023-24 proved to be a good year for equity 
markets. The buoyancy can be attributed to 
expectations of policy continuity, chances of interest 
rate cuts from the US Federal Reserve and RBI, 
foreign and domestic investment inflows as well as 
robust domestic economic expansion.  The S&P BSE 
Sensex closed at 73,651.35, while the Nifty 50 closed 

**X-	 Vªstjh ifjpkyu**

**1-	 flLVe rjyrk dk voyksdu**

**2-	 fuf'pr vk; ¼,l,yvkj@,u,l,yvkj½**

**3-	 bfDoVh ,oa E;qpqvy QaM**

----

at 22,326.90 on 31.03.2024. Over the past one year, 
the S&P BSE Sensex gained 24.9 per cent while the 
Nifty surged by 28.6 per cent.

**4.	
Forex**

	
The Indian Rupee ended FY 2023-24 at 83.40, 
registering a fall of 1.5 per cent against the US dollar 
as compared to 7.8 per cent decline in FY 2022-23. 
The Indian Rupee fared better as compared to other 
emerging market currencies on account of record 
foreign portfolio inflows. The pair remained stable 
during the fiscal despite headwinds in the form of 
surging oil prices amid geo-political escalations.

**XI.	 CUSTOMER CARE**

	
The Bank fully realizes the importance of customer service 
and continues to lay utmost priority to render prompt 
and efficient service to customers.  In order to achieve 
the desired objective, the Bank has formulated a robust 
Grievance Redressal Policy keeping in view the guidelines 
issued by Reserve Bank of India on Customer Service. 
The Bank is ensuring the redressal of the grievances of 
customers within the framework laid down in the said policy. 

1.	
The Bank has an on-line Grievance Redressal 
Management Portal called Centralized Grievance 
Redressal Monitoring System (CGRMS), which is an 
in-house portal. Through this system, the customer 
gets an immediate acknowledgement and can keep 
a track of the complaint also.  Customer Grievances 
are received via various channels such as:

a.	
MD & CEO / Chairman/ Ministry of Finance/RBI 
etc.

b.	
Department of Public Grievance such as 
Centralised Public Grievance Redress and 
Monitoring Mechanism (CPGRAM)/ Integrated 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism (INGRAM)

c.	
Contact centers (Toll free/ Tolled numbers)

d.	
Internet Banking Service / Mobile Banking app / 
Corporate Website.

e.	
Email at care@pnb.co.in 

f.	
Social Media such as Facebook, Twitter, 
LinkedIn and other social media platforms

g.	
Post

h.	
Complaints in Person at Branch Offices

2.	
The status of complaints received by the Bank is 
reviewed by “Customer Service Committee of the 
Board”, a Sub-Committee of the Board, on quarterly 
basis. 

**4-	 fons'kh eqæk**

**XI-	 xzkgd lsok**

**,- 	 ,eMh ,oa lhbZvks@vè;{k@foÙk ea=ky;@vkjchvkbZ 
vkfnA**

bZ-	
care@pnb.co-in ij bZesy fd;k tk ldrk gSA

**th- 	Mkd**

**,p- 	'kk[kk dk;kZy;ksa esa O;fäxr :i ls f'kdk;rsa**

----

3.	
The Bank has in place an Internal Ombudsman 
as per the recommendations of the Damodaran 
Committee. The system ensures greater transparency 
in the redressal of grievances by the Bank. 

4.	
For faster resolution of complaints, the Bank has 
designated Chief Customer Executive Officer (CCEO) 
with the rank of Deputy General Manager at Zonal 
Offices and Chief Manager at Circle offices whom can 
be approached by the customers for redressal of his 
grievance. The contact details of CCEOs have also 
been displayed at Bank’s website.

5.	
Customer Service Committees in all the branches 
and Circle Offices look into the quality of customer 
service rendered and critically examine the feedback/
suggestions for improvement in customer service. 
These committees meet once in a month where staff 
and the invited customers interact freely on service-
related issues. 

6.	
A monthly magazine “Customer Speaks” is 
published in which selected complaints filed by 
customers and the action taken/resolution provided 
to the complainants are also mentioned. Appreciation 
letters issued by customers appreciating the service 
of officials of the bank are also published in the 
magazine. 

7.	
Theme Based Meetings are being conducted at 
monthly intervals in branches on a pre-decided date 
and theme to improve awareness among field staff 
about bank’s products and services, and to sensitize 
them about the issues of maximum importance. 

8.	
Regular training sessions are arranged at Call Centre 
for Customer Service Agents (CSAs) so that they 
can handle customer calls properly and resolve their 
trivial issues by giving correct/latest information that 
customer wants about the products/services. 

9.	
The Bank has state-of-the-art Primary Contact 
Centers at Gurugram and Noida to provide tele-
banking services to its customers on 24 x 7 x 365 
basis through two leading service providers. In 
addition to these two primary sites, the Bank has 
also established two Secondary Contact Centers 
at Dehradun and Bhopal to provide tele-banking 
services to its customers in 13 languages. 

10.	 The customer’s complaints are stored in two online 
portals i.e., CGRMS Portal and Contact Centre’s 
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) Portal. 
The nature of complaints received at CGRMS Portal 
are largely Non Digital while in CRM Portal, they are 
largely Digital transaction related. 

----

11.	 A total of 14,83,719 complaints were received during 
the FY 2023-24, out of which 3,53,524 complaints were 
resolved within T+1 days of its receipt. As such, these 
have not been treated as complaints. Therefore, the 
total number of reported complaints received during 
FY 2023-24 is 11,30,195. The details of complaints 
received and disposed during FY 2023-24 is as follows:

Particular
Count*

Number of complaints pending at beginning of the Year
23,185

Number of complaints received during the Year
11,30,195

Number of complaints disposed during the Year
11,21,029

Number of complaints pending at the end of the Year
32,351

* Excluding complaints which were resolved within T+1 days of the receipt.

**XII.	 IMPLEMENTATION OF OFFICIAL LANGUAGE**

	
Punjab National Bank has always been a pioneer in the 
implementation of Official language Hindi. Your Bank 
continued to make concerted efforts to comply with 
the instructions received from Department of Official 
Language, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of 
India, Committee of Parliament on Official Language and 
Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance. 
Your Bank has achieved most of the targets prescribed in 
annual programme for the Financial Year 2023-24 issued 
by Department of Official Language, Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Government of India.  

	
It is the matter of pleasure to inform that during the financial 
year 2023-24 the Bank has been awarded the 1st prize under 
the “Rajbhasha Kirti” award of the Government of India for 
“A” Region and 2nd prize given for Bank’s in-house magazine 
“PNB Pratibha”. Five awards were received by various 
offices of the Bank from the Regional Implementation Office 
of the Ministry of Home Affairs. Further various offices/staff 
members of the Bank have won a large number of awards 
from various Govt. Institutes

**1.	
Actions taken for and progress made in 
implementation of the Annual Program for 
Progressive Use of Hindi**

a.	
The Bank has a well-organized mechanism for 
implementation of the Official Language, which 
is functioning well under the supervision of the 
Official Language Department established at 
the Head Office. Official Language Department 
is established in all the zonal offices, circle 
offices and training centres, which implement 
the official language policy duly approved by the 
Board of Directors of the Bank in their offices 
and subordinate offices and branches.

b.	
Intensive monitoring was done to achieve the 
targets prescribed in the Annual Programme 
of Department of Official Language, Ministry of 
Home Affairs. Official Language (OL) Policy of 
the Bank and Rajbhasha Corporate Action Plan 
are in place.  

* mu f'kdk;rksa dks NksM+dj ftudk lekèkku çkfIr ds Vh$1 fnu ds Hkhrj dj fn;k x;k Fkk-

**XII- 	cSad esa jktHkk"kk fganh dk dk;kZUo;u**

----

c.	
Awards were given to winner offices/employees 
under Lala Lajpat Rai Shield Scheme, other 
incentive schemes and Hindi competitions to 
increase the use of Hindi in the Bank.

d.	
The Bank's quarterly in-house magazine "PNB 
Pratibha" and half yearly Hindi magazines of 
Zonal Offices & other offices are published 
regularly. Hindi books were made available in 
Hindi libraries established at various level.

e.	
All 
India 
level 
Inter 
Bank 
Hindi 
Essay 
Competition was organized on the subject 
“Digital transformation of banking”.

f.	
A total of 8 Hindi books were awarded by the 
Bank under the Original Hindi Book Writing 
Scheme (for working and retired staff) during the 
year 2023-24.

**2.	
Official Language Committees and their meetings**

a.	
The 
meetings 
of 
the 
Official 
Language 
Implementation Committee of the Head Office 
were held quarterly under the chairmanship of the 
Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer.

b.	
PNB has efficiently discharged the responsibility 
of convener of 28 Town Official Language 
Implementation Committees across the country. 
Half yearly meetings of these committees were 
organized regularly and Hindi competitions, 
Hindi workshops, Hindi seminars etc. were 
organized during the year. 

c.	
Quarterly 
meetings 
of 
official 
language 
committees were organized regularly by all the 
offices of the Bank. 

**3.	
External Inspection/Official Language Seminar/
Conference**

a.	
A 
three-day 
All 
India 
Official 
Language 
Conference and Review Meeting of the Official 
Language Officers of the Bank was organized in 
Delhi by the Head Office under the chairmanship 
of Executive Director Shri Binod Kumar and in the 
presence of Mrs. Anshuli Arya, IAS, Secretary, 
Department of Official Language, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Government of India. Intensive 
monitoring of all offices was done through official 
language inspection and annual review meetings.

b.	
Rajbhasha Seminar was organized by the Head 
Office on the topic “Global Perspective of Official 
Language Hindi”. Ms. Kumud Sharma, Vice 
President Sahitya Akademi and Head of the 
Department, Hindi Department, Delhi University 
was present as the chief speaker in the seminar.

**2-	 jktHkk"kk lacaèkh lfefr;ka vkSj mudh cSBdsa**

**3-	 cká fujh{k.k@jktHkk"kk laxks"Bh@lEesyu%**

----

c.	
Official 
language 
implementation 
was 
appreciated during the inspections of the Head 
Office by the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Financial Services.

d.	
The work done in Hindi was appreciated by 
the Third Sub-Committee of the Parliamentary 
Official 
Language 
Committee 
during 
the 
inspections of Circle Office: Shimla, Circle 
Office: Thane, Circle Office: Jaipur, Circle Office: 
Rajkot and Circle Office: Panipat.

e.	
Rajbhasha inspection of Zonal Office, Agra, 
Circle Office, Bardhaman and Circle Office, 
Rohtak was done by the Draft and Evidence 
Subcommittee of the Parliamentary Official 
Language Committee. 

f.	
Hindi Day and Hindi Month were celebrated 
enthusiastically in the Bank. Lala Lajpat Rai Shield 
was given to the winners by Managing Director 
and Chief Executive Officer and Executive 
Directors in the main official language function 
organized at Head office. Kavi Sammelan was 
organized and a captivating presentation was 
given by eminent poets Dr. Ashok Chakradhar 
and Ms. Madhumohini Upadhyay.

**4.	
Progress made in the use of Hindi in Information 
Technology**

a.	
The website of the Bank is completely bilingual 
and it opens in Hindi by default.

b.	
Facility of Hindi and regional languages are 
available in ATM.

c.	
SMS alerts have been sent to customers in 
their preferred language (Hindi and regional 
language).

d.	
Online Hindi reporting of all the Branches, 
Circles, Zones and Divisions of the Head Office 
was done on the ‘Rajbhasha web portal’. 

e.	
Bilingualization of Finacle and HRMS was done 
through Linguify software updated version. 
Along with it, Bilingual facility is available to work 
on all computers.

f.	
Mobile banking app ‘PNB ONE’ was implemented 
in the new revamped look in various regional 
languages including Hindi.

g.	
Internet Banking is available in Hindi as well as 
in regional languages.

h.	
A daily Hindi podcast is being released on 
Banking subject.

i.	
Online Hindi courses were introduced for the 
employees on the Bank's e-learning portal PNB 
Univ, on passing which the employees are given 
marks in PAF.

**4- 	 lwpuk çkS|ksfxdh esa fganh ds ç;ksx esa gqbZ çxfr**

**[k-	 ,Vh,e esa fganh rFkk {ks=h; Hkk"kkvksa dh lqfoèkk miyCèk gSA**

**t-	 cSafdax fo"k; ij nSfud fganh i‚MdkLV tkjh fd;k tk 
jgk gSA**

----

j.	
Hindi version of WhatsApp Banking is available 
for the customers.

**5.	
Special work and programmes regarding the use 
of Hindi**

a.	
The Bank, for the first time, organized a 
conference for the Heads of 28  Nagar Rajbhasha 
Karyanvayan Samiti (NARAKASES) in which 
our Bank is convener. This conference was 
successfully completed under the chairmanship 
of Managing Director and Chief Executive 
Officer of the Bank, Mr. Atul Kumar Goel and 
the dignified presence of Secretary, Mrs. Anshuli 
Arya, Ministry of Home Affairs.

b.	
A brief booklet of Official Language Policy 
'Rajbhasha Path-Pradarshak' was published 
by the Bank, which was launched by Managing 
Director and Chief Executive Officer Mr. Atul 
Kumar Goel and Mrs. Anshuli Arya, (IAS) 
Secretary, Department of Official Language. This 
booklet was distributed to all the participants at the 
third All India Official Language Conference Pune 
organized by Department of Official Language, 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India.

c.	
Rajbhasha module of Mobile app “PNB Pride” 
was launched to digitalize the official language 
implementation in the Bank.

d.	
Online module of Hindi knowledge roaster was 
added in HRMS and other modules including 
salary slip were made available in bilingual form.

e.	
Booklets to learn Hindi through regional 
languages Gujarati, Punjabi, Bengali, Assamese 
were published for employees.

f.	
Arrangements for training/workshop and 
translation: Hindi Training was imparted to staff 
members through Hindi workshops, Unicode 
Training and Desk Training by HO.ZO.CO and 
Training Centres.

**6.	
Bilingual 
status 
of 
circulars/forms/other 
documents**

a.	
During the year, circulars issued by the divisions 
of the Head Office were uploaded on Bank’s 
Portal in bilingual form

b.	
The forms used by customers are also available 
in Hindi/bilingual and regional languages.

c.	
To facilitate the work in Hindi, “Standard Draft” 
of daily letters/office notes related to various 
departments is available on the e-portal of the 
Bank.

d.	
Hindi and regional languages were used in 
publicity and promotional campaigns related to 
the Bank's schemes and products.

**5-	 fganh ds ç;ksx ds lacaèk esa fo'ks"k dk;Z ,oa dk;ZØe%**

**bZ- 	 {ks=h; Hkk"kkvksa ls fganh lh[kus ds fy, xqtjkrh] iatkch] 
ckaXyk] vlfe;k Hkk"kkvksa dh lgkf;dk çdkf'kr dh xbZA**

**6- 	 ifji=ksa@QkeksZa@vU; nLrkostksa dh f}Hkk"kh fLFkfr%**

----

**XIII.	PNB’S SUBSIDIARIES AND REGIONAL RURAL BANKS**

**1.	
DOMESTIC SUBSIDIARIES**

a.	
PNB Gilts Ltd.: FY 2023-24 started with the 
bond markets witnessing gains, reflecting 
strong demand for government securities on 
expectation of a likely shift of stance after the 
Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC) largely 
unanticipated move to pause on the policy repo 
rate. The decline in the US treasury yields also 
supported the market sentiments. However, 
yields hardened during the end of the first quarter 
following MPC’s focus on aligning inflation with 
the target of 4 per cent, which was perceived to 
be hawkish by the market participants. Domestic 
bond yields started the second quarter with a 
hardening bias in response to rising US treasury 
yields and a strong US GDP data. Towards 
the end of the second quarter, higher inflation 
prints and strong economic data led to firming 
of domestic yields. Third quarter also saw a 
hardening bias in response to rising US treasury 
yields, with the domestic 10-yr yield peaking at 
7.38 per cent as on 23rd October, 2023. Towards 
the end of the third quarter, US yields plunged on 
the back of dovish tone of the Fed Reserve in its 
December policy meet and expectation of rate 
cuts in the coming year. Q4 FY 2023-24 marked 
some significant moves in both domestic and 
global bond markets. The 10-year US treasury 
yields hovered in the range of 4.18 per cent 
to 4.32 per cent during the quarter, ending the 
quarter at 4.19 per cent. The swing in yields 
was broadly in response to the Federal Open 
Market Committee (FOMC) keeping the policy 
rates unchanged, thus reinforcing the bets of no 
further rate hikes by the Fed and a rise in the 
odds of a rate cut by the Fed in March 2024. On 
the other hand, the Indian 10-year benchmark 
bond yields eased from 7.21 per cent to 7.14 
percent during January end as Bloomberg 
Index Services proposed including some Indian 
bonds in its emerging market local currency 
index from September 2024 and saw another 
sharp drop in yields to 7.06 per cent following 
the announcement of the Interim Budget on 1st 
February, 2024. Indian bond yields were range 
bound for most of March, ending the quarter 
(Q4) at 7.05 per cent.

	
During the year, the 10-yr benchmark yield 
touched a high and low of 7.38 per cent and 6.96 
per cent respectively and closed at 7.05 per cent 
as on 31st March, 2024. Against the backdrop 
of uncertain market conditions, PNB Gilts Ltd 
continued to fulfill all its obligations as a Primary 
Dealer mandated by RBI both in Primary and 

**XIII-	ih,uch dh lgk;d daifu;ka vkSj {ks=h; xzkeh.k cSad**

**1- 	 ?kjsyw lgk;d daifu;k¡**

----

Secondary market. Company posted a Profit 
Before Tax (PBT) of Rs. 99 Crore during FY 
2023-24 vis-à-vis PBT of Rs. (85) Crore during 
FY 2022-23. Profit after Tax (PAT) amounted 
to Rs. 69 Crore during FY 2023-24 as against  
Rs. (77) Crore during FY 2022-23. Capital 
adequacy remains strong with its Capital to Risk 
Weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) at 34.0 per cent 
as on 31st March, 2024 well above the regulatory 
minimum of 15 per cent for Primary Dealers 
(PDs).

b.	
PNB Investment Services Limited (PNBISL): 
The Company is a profit-making company from 
the very first year of its operations. During the 
year ended as on 31st March, 2024, the Company 
registered operational (fee-based) income of 
Rs.8 Crore and total income of Rs.11 Crore as 
against a fee- based income of Rs.7 Crore and 
total income of Rs.10 Crore for the year ended as 
on 31st March, 2023. Profit before Tax during the 
period ended as on 31st March, 2024 was Rs.5.50 
Crore as against Rs.5 Crore for the period ended 
as on 31st March, 2023.

	
The Company operates in three verticals, 
namely Corporate Advisory, Merchant Banking 
and Security Trustee. In the Corporate Advisory 
Vertical, during the year PNBISL advised many 
marquees business groups and corporate 
clients on various transactions, including debt 
syndication, debt resolution and other corporate 
advisory assignments. With in-house expertise 
and deep understanding of select sectors, 
PNBISL 
prepared 
and 
delivered 
credible 
Techno-Economic Viability (TEV) & Lenders 
Independent Engineer services (LIE) reports to 
its clients.

	
In Corporate Advisory Vertical, during the FY 
2023-24, the company able to complete majorly 
two Debt Syndication assignments. Company 
has also completed approx. 20 assignments of 
U P State Industrial Development Authorities 
(UPSIDA). Company is now part of Mahatma 
Phule Renewable Energy and Infrastructure 
Technology 
Ltd 
(MAHAPREIT) 
Alternative 
Investment Fund (AIF) promoted by Government 
of Maharashtra. FY 2023-24 was a significant 
year for the Debt Resolution (Swiss Challenge) 
practice of the Company and the Company 
undertook and completed 8 significant Debt 
Resolution leading v/s 3 such transactions 
done in the whole of FY 2022-23. Now with the 
credentials already being in place company 
believes the business will only increase in FY 
2024-25.

----

	
In Merchant Banking Vertical, during the 
FY 2023-24, company able to showcase its 
strengths to the markets in the form of timely 
filing of documents to regulatory authorities 
in nearly all the Equity Capital Market (ECM) 
product verticals i.e., Initial Public Offers (IPOs), 
Rights Issue and Open Offer assignments.

	
The Company successfully completed the 
IPO mandate of Pyramid Technoplast Ltd, 
raising Rs.153 Crore with the issue being 
oversubscribed. Apart from this IPO Assignment, 
the 
company 
also 
completed 
two 
other 
assignments i.e., a small rights issue and open 
offer assignment.

	
The growth for trusteeship segment in FY 
2023-24 was stagnant and the revenue took 
a significant hit in the financial year owing to 
various reasons including the reduction in the 
overall market pricing of the security trustee 
assignments, increase in competition.

	
However, the segment has tried to overcome the 
challenge by expanding the range of products 
offered as per the market trends by rendering 
the services of escrow trustee for one of the 
major NBFCs. The Company continues to add 
on new clients and build on its strategy to be a 
trusted partner of leading banks and corporates.

	
Going forward, the company is committed to 
build on its capabilities across business verticals 
such as credit appraisal & debt syndication 
services, TEV consultancy, Merchant Banking 
services and Security Trusteeship services to 
offer greater value to the parent bank and all its 
stake holders.

c.	
PNB Cards and Services Limited (PNBCSL): 
PNBCSL is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Punjab 
National Bank (PNB) incorporated on 16th March, 
2021 in terms of RBI approval letter dated 7th 
December, 2020 to undertake the non-financial 
support services related to credit card business 
of the Punjab National Bank. RBI vide letter dated 
13th January, 2023, has conveyed their approval 
to PNB for undertaking additional non-financial 
support services by PNBCSL. As per their 
approval, PNBCSL may provide the following 
non-financial support services viz. sourcing, 
marketing, promoting, publicizing, advertising, 
soliciting distributing Deposit (Current and 
Saving Accounts etc.) and Retail Loan Products 
(Housing Loan, Loan against property, Vehicle 
Loan, Education loan, Personal loan etc.).

----

	
Accordingly, 
to 
Leverage 
its 
existing 
infrastructure and expertise, PNBCSL has 
successfully commenced sourcing for Housing 
Loans, Vehicle Loans, Education Loans, and 
CASA products in FY 2023-24.

	
PNBCSL’s geographic footprint grew significantly 
having 7 Territory offices with a presence in 
over 50 locations nationwide. This expansion is 
supported by a team exceeding 400 personnel 
dedicated to delivering exceptional service to 
the customers.

	
PNBCSL played a pivotal role in acquiring 
customers for the Bank. During FY 2023-24, the 
Company has served to more than 2.15 Lakh 
customers, surpassing the 2 Lakh credit card 
approvals and clocked fresh sanctions of more 
than Rs.500 Crore in Retail segment.

	
PNBCSL maintained its profitability trajectory, 
achieving a net profit after tax of Rs.2.25 Crore 
for FY 2023-24, demonstrating its continued 
contribution to the Bank's success.

	
PNBCSL remains committed to offering high-
quality services and expanding its reach to serve 
a broader customer base.

**2.	
INTERNATIONAL SUBSIDIARIES**

a.	
PNB International Limited (PNBIL): Punjab 
National Bank (International) Limited was 
incorporated in the UK on 13th April, 2006 
and registered with the Companies House in 
England & Wales. The Bank is authorized by 
the Prudential Regulation Authority (‘PRA’) and 
regulated by Financial Conduct Authority (‘FCA’) 
to conduct banking Business in UK. 

	
The total deposits increased from Rs. 6,644 
Crore as on 31st March, 2023 to Rs. 6,664 Crore 
as on 31st March, 2024, showing YoY growth 
of 0.30 per cent. Total advance increased from 
Rs. 7,572 Crore as on 31st March, 2023 to  
Rs. 7,726 Crore as on 31st March 2024, showing 
YoY growth of 2.0 per cent. In the FY 2023-24, 
PNBIL recorded a Net Profit of Rs. 90.42 Crore 
as per Indian Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles (IGAAP) and Rs.52.46 Crore as per 
International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS).

**2- 	 varjkZ"Vªh; lgk;d daifu;k¡**

----

	
PNBIL’s main business is to provide commercial 
and retail banking services to different segments of 
customers, with a focus on the Indian community 
within the UK. This includes accepting deposits 
from both retail and corporate clients; lending to 
retail, SME, and corporate clients; and transaction 
banking services such as currency remittances. 
The deposit products primarily include current, 
savings, term deposits and Individual Saving 
Accounts. Some of these products such as ISAs 
(Individual Savings Accounts) and Fixed deposits 
are also being availed by a wider audience in the 
UK. The lending products includes real estate 
lending i.e., Buy to Let– Residential, Commercial, 
Development Loans and Hotels & Hospitalities, 
lending to SME and Term loans backed by 
SBLCs. 

b.	
Druk PNB Bank Ltd (DPNBL): Druk PNB Bank 
Ltd, Bhutan, Banking Company having its corporate 
office at Thimphu, Bhutan. It started its operation 
on 27th January, 2010, in Bhutan as the country’s 
fourth commercial Bank, with a component of 
both FDI and joint venture in the Banking Sector. 
Presently, the Bank has 9 branches and 30 ATMs 
spread across the country.

	
Total advances of DPNBL increased from 
Rs.1,706 Crore as on 31st March, 2023 to 
Rs.1,914 Crore as on 31st March, 2024 i.e. YoY 
increase of 12.2 per cent. 

	
Total deposits of DPNBL increased from  
Rs. 2,459 Crore as on 31st March, 2023 to Rs. 
2,590 Crore as on 31st March, 2024 i.e. YoY 
increase of 5.3 per cent.

	
Profit of the Bank has increased to Rs.49 Crore 
as on 31st March, 2024 from Rs.33 Crore as on 
31st March 2023. Paid up capital of the Bank as 
on 31st March, 2024 is Rs.168 Crore increased 
from Rs. 84 Crore as on 31st March 2023 after 
rights issue in July 2023

3.	
REGIONAL RURAL BANKS (RRBs): As on 31st 
March, 2024, there are nine RRBs sponsored by 
the bank namely Dakshin Bihar Gramin Bank 
(DBGB), Patna; Sarva Haryana Gramin Bank 
(SHGB), Rohtak; Himachal Pradesh Gramin 
Bank (HPGB); Mandi; Punjab Gramin Bank 
(PGB), Kapurthala; Prathama UP Gramin Bank 
(PUPGB), Moradabad; Assam Gramin Vikas 
Bank (AGVB), Guwahati; Bangiya Gramin Vikas 
Bank (BGVB), Berhampore; Tripura Gramin 
Bank (TGB), Agartala and Manipur Rural Bank 
(MRB), Imphal.  These nine RRBs are operating 
in 9 states namely Bihar, Haryana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, 

----

Assam, Manipur and Tripura covering 185 
districts with a network of 4671 branches.  

a.	
Total Business of sponsored RRBs as on 
31st March, 2024 is Rs. 2,23,646 Crore 
registering a YoY growth of 9.2 per cent. 

b.	
Deposits of RRBs are at Rs. 1,41,131 
Crore as on 31st March, 2024. Aggregate 
Deposits registered a YoY growth of 8.3 per 
cent. 

c.	
The Advances of the RRBs as on 31st 

March, 2024 stood at Rs. 82,515 Crore with 
a YoY growth of 10.7 per cent.  

d.	
As per RBI guidelines it is mandatory for 
RRBs to meet the regulatory requirement 
of CRAR of 9 per cent. The RRBs attaining 
CRAR over and above the regulatory 
requirement are TGB (24.35 per cent), 
PGB (16.47 per cent), SHGB (14.87 per 
cent), PUPGB (13.32 per cent), BGVB 
(12.48 per cent) and MRB (10.73 per 
cent). The RRBs having CRAR less than 
the regulatory requirement are DBGB 
(2.44 per cent), HPGB (8.16 per cent) 
and AGVB (8.70 per cent). As an outcome 
of operational efficiency of 2 RRBs are 
expected to achieve CRAR of 9 per cent in 
the next financial year, however more time 
is needed for DBGB. The recapitalization 
assistance by Centre/ State will help in 
improving CRAR.

e.	
The sponsored RRBs are in profit (except 
MRB Imphal). Operating profit of RRBs as 
a whole stood at Rs.2648 Crore as on 31st 

March, 2024.

f.	
The RRBs have cumulatively disbursed 
Rs. 2760 Crore under PMMY/ MUDRA as 
on 31st March, 2024, achieving 70.77% 
of targeted budget of Rs 3900 Crores for 
disbursement.

**XIV.	AWARDS AND ACCOLADES**

	
The Bank’s efforts have been recognized at various 
platforms. The Bank has been conferred with the following 
for initiatives taken in various fields for FY 2023-24:

1.	
Awards Certificate for Treasury Strategist of the 
Year for leadership and contribution to the Treasury 
Management by Treasury Summit & Awards 2024 by 
India Treasury Summit & Awards 

2.	
Overall 3rd Rank under EASE Reforms 5.0 with 1st 

Runners Up in the themes such as Digital Enabled 
Customer Offerings and Big Data & Analytics. 

**if'pe caxky] vle] ef.kiqj vkSj f=iqjk esa 4671 'kk[kkvksa ds 
usVodZ ds lkFk 185 ftyksa dks doj dj jgs gSaA**

**XIV-	iqjLdkj vkSj ç'kalk**

----

3.	
9th Innovative CIOs Awards & Symposium 2024 for 
2 projects such as e-BG and PNB Aarambh by CIO 
Axis. 

4.	
Best MSME Bank in 10th MSME Excellence Awards 
2024 by ASSOCHAM

5.	
Award for "Best Data Quality in Commercial 
Bureau Segment” for 2023-24 during the Annual 
Conference of General Managers of PSBs organized 
by IBA & TransUnion (TU) CIBIL in Mumbai.

6.	
Data Excellence Award in Consumer Bureau 
segment by CRIF Highmark during CRIF InFocus 
Seminar.

7.	
Best MSME Friendly Bank by Chamber of Indian 
MSME (CIMSME).

8.	
At the 19th Annual Banking Technology Conference, 
Expo and Awards 2023 Runner-up award for the 
Best Fintech and DPI Adoption by Indian Banks’ 
Association (IBA).

9.	
Excellence in Gender Inclusion Award by Jury of 
International Inclusion Alliance.

10.	 SCOPE Meritorious Award for innovative Practices 
in Women Empowerment 2016-17-Commendation 
Certificate.

11.	 Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 
has been felicitated for attaining Second position in 
the category of Public Sector Banks with Highest 
Pledge Finance. 

12.	 Recognition for Excellence in Customer Service 
at Index of Service Excellence of India (iSEI) 
Event 2023. Jagdish Sheth School of Management 
(JAGSoM) has introduced this index. 

**13.	 IBSi Global Fintech Innovation Awards under 
following 2 categories:**

a.	
Best Digital Channel/Platform Implementation: 
Best Adopted Tools & Practices for the PNB 
ONE-Super App Initiative.

b.	
Best Transaction Banking Implementation.

14.	 23rd Greentech Environment Award 2023” for 
outstanding 
achievements 
in 
"Environmental 
Excellence" category.

15.	 ‘Green Ribbon Champions’ award under the category- 
‘CSR Green Initiative of the Year’ for planting more 
than 1 lakh trees under the project PNB Palaash.

16.	 Rajbhasha Kirti First Prize FY 2022-23 at the Hindi 
Diwas Celebrations held during Third All India Official 
Language Conference 2023. Rajbhasha Kirti Second 

**9- 	 varjkZ"Vªh; lekos'ku ,yk;al dh twjh }kjk fyax lekos'ku 
esa mR—"Vrk iqjLdkjA**

**13- 	fuEufyf[kr 2 Jsf.k;ksa ds rgr vkbZch,lvkbZ Xykscy 
fQuVsd buksos'ku iqjLdkj%**

**ch- 	 lokZsÙke ysunsu cSafdax dk;kZUo;uA**

----

prize for the FY 2022-23 for their in-house magazine 
PNB Pratibha.

17.	 Infosys Finacle Innovation Awards 2023 in Finacle 
India Banking Connect 2023

a.	
Maximizing Customer Engagement – Platinum 
winner-PNB One - Super App.

b.	
Channel Innovation – Gold winner-e-OTS.

18.	 APY National Championship and Annual Target 
Achievement Award. 

**XV.	 FUTURE BUSINESS PLAN OF THE BANK**

	
As the Bank embarks on new journey in the Financial Year 
2024-25, it will continue to soar higher and achieve better 
than before. The Bank will remain focused on business 
growth by way of small ticket advances and enhancing 
CASA portfolio. 

	
Growth and Profitability will continue to drive our 
approach.  The Bank will cater to a wider range of financial 
needs by expanding its product portfolio, exploring 
newer markets and customer segments, and optimizing 
operational efficiency. 

	
The Bank will accelerate its digital journey offering 
seamless online and mobile banking experience. PNB 
will ensure to utilize AI-powered tools for providing 
personalized financial solutions to all the customers. 

	
Customer Centricity will be one of the key areas where 
Bank will pay more attention. Through substantial efforts, 
PNB will continue to exceed customer expectations by 
way of offering innovating products and services, investing 
in employee training and strengthening internal processes.

	
The Bank will continue to provide adequate attention to 
overall growth and development of all its employees by 
investing in training and grooming its people. PNB UDAAN 
project has been intended to deliver the outcomes by way 
of self-driven employees of the Bank.  

	
FY 2024-25  promises to be a year of exciting growth and 
transformation. By focusing on these areas, the Bank will 
solidify its position in the industry as a leading financial 
institution.

**XVI.	BOARD OF DIRECTORS**

1.	
Shri Anil Kumar Misra, RBI Nominee Director, ceased 
to be director w.e.f. 14.07.2023.

2.	
Smt. Uma Sankar has been appointed as RBI 
Nominee Director of the Bank w.e.f. 14.07.2023.

3.	
Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director, completed his 
tenure on 31.08.2023.

**,- 	 xzkgd tqM+ko dks vfèkdre djuk & IySfVue 
fotsrk&ih,uch ou & lqij ,siA**

**ch- 	 pSuy buksos'ku & xksYM fotsrk&bZ&vksVh,lA**

**XV-	cSad dh Hkkoh dkjksckj ;kstuk**

**XVI- funs'kd eaMy**

**1- 	 Jh vfuy dqekj feJk] vkjchvkbZ ukfer funs'kd dk 14-07-
2023 ls dk;Zdky lekIrA**

**2- 	 Jherh mek 'kadj dks 14-07-2023- ls cSad ds vkjchvkbZ 
ukfer funs'kd ds :i esa fu;qä fd;k x;k gSA**

**3- 	 Jh fot; nqcs] dk;Zikyd funs'kd dk dk;Zdky 31-08-2023 
dks iw.kZ gqvkA**

----

4.	
Shri Gautam Guha, Shareholder Director, completed 
his tenure on 05.10.2023.

5.	
Shri Jatinder Singh Bajaj, Shareholder Director, has 
been elected as Shareholder Director of the Bank 
w.e.f. 06.10.2023.

6.	
Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra has been appointed as 
Executive Director of the Bank w.e.f. 09.10.2023.

**XVII.	SECRETARIAL AUDIT REPORT**

	
The Secretarial Auditor in the Reports has made observations 
in respect of (i) vacancies of Workmen Employee Director, 
Officer Employee Director, CA Director and one Part-Time 
Non-Official Director on the Board of the Bank and (ii) 
non-compliance of Securities & Exchange Board of India 
(SEBI) Listing Obligations & Disclosure Requirements 
(LODR) Regulations with respect to composition of the 
Audit Committee of the Board for the period 01.04.2023 
to 18.07.2023. However, with effect from 19.07.2023, the 
composition of the Audit Committee of the Board is in 
compliance of SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015.

**XVIII. DIRECTORS’ RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT**

	
The Directors confirm that in the preparation of the annual 
accounts for the year ended 31st March, 2024:

1.	
The applicable Accounting Standards have been 
followed along with proper explanation relating to 
material departures, if any;

2.	
The accounting policies, framed in accordance with 
the guidelines of the Reserve Bank of India, were 
consistently applied;

3.	
Reasonable and prudent judgment and estimates 
were made so as to give a true and fair view of the 
state of affairs of the Bank at the end of the financial 
year and of the profit of the Bank for the year ended 
31st March, 2024.

4.	
Proper and sufficient care was taken for the 
maintenance of adequate accounting records in 
accordance with the provisions of applicable laws 
governing banks in India, and; 

5.	
The accounts have been prepared based on the 
principle of “going concern”.

**XIX.	ACKNOWLEDGEMENT**

	
The Board of Directors thank the shareholders, valued 
customers, well-wishers and other stakeholders for their 
goodwill, patronage and support.

	
The Board acknowledges with gratitude for the guidance 
and support of Government of India, Reserve Bank of 
India, Securities & Exchange Board of India, Insurance 

**5- 	 Jh tfranj flag ctkt] 'ks;jèkkjd funs'kd dks 06-10-2023 
ls cSad ds 'ks;jèkkjd funs'kd ds :i esa pquk x;k gSA**

**XVII-lfpoh; ys[kkijh{kk fjiksVZ**

**XVIII-funs'kd mÙkjnkf;Ro fooj.kh**

**XIX- vkHkkj**

----

Regulatory and Development Authority of India, Central 
Vigilance Commission, Stock Exchanges and Statutory 
Central Auditors of the Bank, in the functioning of the Bank. 

	
The Board also placed on record its appreciation for the 
valuable contribution made by the members of the Bank’s 
staff at all levels and looks forward to their continued 
involvement in achieving the future goals.

	

	
For and on behalf of Board of Directors

	

**Atul Kumar Goel**

	
Managing Director & CEO

**funs'kd eaMy ds fy, vkSj mudh vksj ls**

**vrqy dqekj xks;y
çcaèk funs'kd ,oa lhbZvks**

----

BLANK PAGE

----

ANNUAL
REPORT

**Management
Discussion &
Analysis**

**प्रबंधन पɼरचचार्
एवं ɾवȦेषण**

----

**MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION & ANALYSIS**

I.	
Industry Structure & Developments

	
The global economy has displayed remarkable resilience in 
Financial Year (FY) 2023-24 amidst enduring wars, tight financial 
conditions and havoc-wreaking climate change. Economies 
across the world are adapting better than expected and this 
provides a strong bedrock for the year ahead. 

	
The risk of a global recession has receded, largely because 
of the strength of the U.S.A. economy. However, mounting 
geopolitical tensions in West Asia could create fresh near-term 
hazards for the world economy. 

	
In its latest World Economic Outlook, the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated global growth at 3.2 per 
cent in 2023, expecting it to remain at that level in 2024 and 
2025. There is relative strength in U.S.A. and Indian economy, 
though Euro Area and China are expected to remain sluggish in 
Calendar Year (CY) 2024.

	
As per IMF, world trade volume growth is projected to rebound 
from 0.3 per cent in 2023 to 3.0 per cent in 2024 and further 
to 3.3 per cent in 2025. However, it remains below its historical 
average growth rate of 4.9 per cent (2000-2019). Overall, 
moderating global inflation and improving economic growth 
forecasts suggest a reversal of the downward trends. However, 
the logistical challenges such as shipping disruptions in the Red 
Sea cast a shadow over the optimistic outlook, and can raise 
costs and disrupt supply chains in the near term.

	
A high level of public debt to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
ratio in both advanced and emerging economies also presents 
another risk to sustainable global growth. Thus, credible fiscal 
consolidation plans, particularly in Advanced Economies (AEs) 
are warranted to support future global economic recovery.

	
On the upside, faster disinflation could lead to easing of financial 
conditions. There is optimism on the inflation front, as most of 
the Central Banks can rein in inflation. According to IMF, global 
headline inflation is expected to fall from 6.8 per cent in 2023 to 
5.9 per cent in 2024 and 4.5 per cent in 2025. With disinflation 
and steady growth, the likelihood of a hard landing has receded, 
and risks to global growth are evenly balanced. 

	
Amidst sluggish global growth, the Indian economy has shown 
great strength and stability. The economy has grown at 8.2 per 
cent in FY 2023-24 (as per Provisional Estimates), marking the 
highest growth rate among major economies, propelled by 
robust domestic demand and government-led investments. 
India is currently the 5th largest economy in the world, with 
ambitions of becoming the 3rd largest by 2027. 

**çcaèku ppkZ vkSj fo'ys"k.k**

I-	
m|ksx lajpuk ,oa fodkl

----

The underlying economic momentum remains strong, exhibited 
by quarterly growth of 8+ per cent for three consecutive quarters. 
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has projected GDP growth at 
7.0 per cent for FY 2024-25, supported by robust government 
and private capital expenditure, enhanced consumption 
demand, improved financial health of corporates & banks and 
digitization of the economy. All the high frequency indicators 
are pointing towards strong and sustained economic growth. 
Goods and Services Tax (GST) collections crossed the 2-Lakh 
Crore mark in April 2024. India’s manufacturing Purchasing 
Manager's Index (PMI) was recorded at 58.8 in April 2024, the 
second strongest expansion since the beginning of 2021. The 
current account deficit is modest at 1.2 per cent of GDP in the 
October-December quarter. Retail inflation is stabilizing, staying 
within RBI’s tolerance band of 2-6 per cent for eight consecutive 
months. Forex reserves rose to an all-time record high of  
USD 648.56 Billion as on 5th April, 2024. The financial sector is 
also sound and well capitalized.

In 2023, while global banking institutes faced testing times, 
Indian banks have shown great resilience. They have held 
their ground in the face of an uncertain global macroeconomic 
environment and interest rate volatility, posting record levels of 
profitability. 

As per the Financial Stability Report (FSR) of RBI, the Return 
on Equity (RoE) and Return on Assets (RoA) of all Scheduled 
Commercial Banks (SCBs) continued to improve to reach 12.9 
per cent and 1.2 per cent respectively, in September 2023, 
driven by improved earnings.

Banking sector asset quality has significantly improved in the last 
few years on account of better lending practices, improved Non-
Performing Asset (NPA) management and higher provisioning. 
There has been a steady improvement in asset quality, with 
the gross non-performing assets (GNPA) ratio for SCBs falling 
to 10-year low at 3.2 per cent as on September 2023. Going 
forward, the banking sector’s asset quality is anticipated to 
improve further on account of healthier balance sheets, higher 
provisioning and improved credit disbursement standards using 
new-age technologies.

All the banks are adequately capitalized. The capital to risk-
weighted asset ratio (CRAR) at end-September 2023 remained 
high at 16.8 per cent vis-à-vis the regulatory minimum of 
11.5 per cent (including capital conservation buffer) while the 
common equity tier 1 (CET1) ratio stood at 13.7 per cent as 
against the regulatory requirement of 8.0 per cent (including 
capital conservation buffer). In November 2023, the regulator 
increased risk weights on unsecured personal loans and lending 
to Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) with immediate 
effect. Impact of risk weights on capital adequacy ratio of banks 
is expected to be around 80-100 bps. 

Healthy interest margins, strong credit demand and lower 
impairments boosted Net Interest Income (NII). Banks are likely 
to witness pressure on their Net Interest Margin (NIM) going 

----

forward due to continued re-pricing of deposit rates. Simultaneously 
expectations of a rate reversal in the current fiscal could start a 
downward pressure on lending yields and hence pressure on interest 
margins is likely to continue during FY 2024-25. 

In FY 2023-24, bank credit growth hit a decadal high of 
around 16 per cent, driven by strong retail demand despite 
high interest rates, supported by corporate loan book on the 
back of higher capacity utilization by the private sector. Credit 
growth is expected to remain healthy at 13-15 per cent in FY 
2024-25, driven by strong demand in the services and the retail 
segments. Rising government and private capex in FY 2024-25 
will also lead to increased demand for corporate credit.

Enhanced spending on infrastructure, speedy implementation 
of projects and continuation of reforms are expected to provide 
further impetus to growth in the banking sector as rapidly 
growing businesses will turn to banks for their credit needs.

Furthermore, there has been notable progress in deposit growth, 
with a healthy increase of 13.5 per cent (including the influence 
of the merger) during FY 2023-24. However, a slower pace of 
deposit accumulation carries the potential risk of limiting credit 
expansion for banks in FY 2024-25. Public Sector Banks (PSBs) are 
comparatively in a stronger position regarding deposits, boasting 
a lower average of Loan-to-Deposit Ratio (LDR). Term deposits for 
Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) experienced a faster growth 
rate of 13.7 per cent compared to the 12.1 per cent growth 
observed in demand deposits.

The PSBs are posting stellar growth. The business of PSBs grew 
on YoY basis by 11.6 per cent in FY 2023-24. The Advances also 
grew by 13.5 per cent on YoY basis. The cumulative profit of 
all PSBs crossed Rs. 1.41 Lakh Crore mark for FY 2023-24 from 
Rs. 1.05 Lakh Crore a year ago, recording a growth of around 
35 per cent.

As a result, Nifty PSU Bank Index has delivered 162 per cent 
returns since March 2022, overshadowing the 24 per cent 
returns of Nifty Private Bank Index over the same period. The 
aggregate market capitalization of PSBs has increased from  
Rs. 5.5 Lakh Crore in March 2021 to more than Rs. 16 Lakh Crore in  
March 2024.

During pandemic, banking sector liquidity was in surplus as 
economic activity halted and credit demand was muted. As 
economic recovery gained pace, demand for credit picked up 
and liquidity in system started to dry up. While liquidity scarcity 
led to fluctuations in short term rates, long term rates remained 
relatively stable in FY 2023-24.  Going forward, RBI is expected 
to continue to proactively manage liquidity till inflation in the 
economy progressively aligns towards the 4 per cent target.

----

In the last year, banking sector has witnessed a profound 
transformation driven by digitalization. The widespread 
adoption of digital technologies has revolutionized customer 
interactions, streamlining processes and enhancing operational 
efficiency. Digital banking platforms have enabled seamless 
transactions, personalized services and real-time access to 
financial products, thereby improving customer experience 
and satisfaction. Moreover, digitalization has facilitated 
the integration of innovative FinTech solutions, fostering 
collaborations and partnerships to deliver innovative financial 
services. As the digital landscape continues to evolve, the 
Bank remains committed to leveraging technology to meet the 
evolving needs of the customers and stay at the forefront of 
industry innovation.

II. 
Opportunities

Credit growth in FY 2023-24 has been robust and recorded 
decadal highs and the trend is expected to continue in  
FY 2024-25. All major sectors viz. agricultural, industry and 
services continue to register robust credit growth. Sub-segments 
including food processing, infrastructure, textiles, trade and 
commercial real estate stand out. The medium-term prospects 
for credit look promising with sustained growth in personal 
loans along with the anticipated increase in capex spending 
- both in the government and private sector. The Centre’s  
50-year interest-free loans to states will boost economic activity 
in the country and lead to higher credit offtake. Further, the 
aerospace sector is expected to witness good traction for credit 
with India opening its space sector to foreign investments. 
India is attracting Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in space 
launches and is aiming for a five-fold increase in its share 
of the global launch market, which is expected to be worth 
USD 47.3 billion by 2032. Moreover, with increasing need for 
electronics driven by the digital transformation across various 
sectors, from automotives to space to information technology, 
the demand for semiconductors in India is estimated to reach  
USD 110 Billion by 2030. This is likely to give a push to 
manufacturing in the country, thereby generating demand for 
credit.

With the India Meteorological Department (IMD) forecasting 
an above-normal monsoon in FY 2024-25, a rise in demand for 
agricultural loans can be anticipated. In the first eleven months 
of FY 2023-24, bank loan to agriculture and allied activities rose 
20.4 per cent to reach Rs. 20.4 Trillion. With a better rain forecast, 
a 22-25 per cent growth in agricultural loans is expected during 
the June-September 2024 period.  Demand is likely to be higher 
on account of working capital requirements for crop production 
activities, loans for buying farm equipment and term loans and 
working capital for allied agriculture activities, especially for 
agriculture storage and financing for food and agro-processing. 

Further, large banks had experienced higher delinquencies on 
part of agricultural credit recently. A good monsoon is expected 
to lower slippages going ahead and the slippage ratio is set to 
improve. An above-normal monsoon will accelerate pickup in 
other types of loans such as vehicle loans and personal loans 

II-	 volj

----

in the coming quarters, as higher income due to better harvest 
will encourage people to buy vehicles and home appliances. 
Also, there are early signs of revival in the rural economy. Two 
wheeler sales grew by double digits in FY 2023-24, crossing  
pre-covid levels, buoyed by sustained demand. In March quarter, 
Fast-Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) industry reported  
6.6 per cent growth in value terms, driven by 6.5 per cent 
growth in volumes, with rural India surpassing urban growth for 
the first time in five quarters.

In case of manufacturing, value of new projects announced 
in Q4 FY 2023-24 saw a sharp growth of almost 160 per cent 
YoY amounting to Rs. 6.7 Lakh Crore. Within manufacturing, 
investments in metal and metal products grew 621 per cent, 
while those in machinery grew 599 per cent. This is also likely 
to augur well for bank credit going ahead. Healthy corporate 
balance sheets, rising optimism, higher demand from the 
services sector and robust momentum in the infrastructure 
sector are expected to bolster private investments. Retail & 
MSME books are seeing healthy traction.

Electric Vehicle (EV) sector in the country is also on the verge 
of witnessing a boom - with EV adoption expected to surge 
over the next few years. Strategic partnerships and investments 
aimed at bolstering India’s EV manufacturing capabilities and 
charging ecosystem are already taking place and the banking 
sector is expected to benefit from it. As per NITI Aayog, 
the two-wheeler EV market size is going to be as large as  
Rs. 35,000-40,000 Crore by FY 2025-26, with the EV financing 
market for this segment expected to touch Rs. 13,000-15,000 
Crore.

In the past two years, Metaverse has been gaining traction 
in the banking industry. With virtual banking experience 
becoming the norm, the industry is set for another revolution 
with Metaverse. Using technologies such as Augmented Reality 
(AR) and Virtual Reality (VR), banks will be able to reinvent their 
product offerings and how they interact with their customers.

Further, many financial institutions are leveraging Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) to automate and streamline their previously 
time-consuming manual processes such as fraud detection, 
risk management and customer service to improve efficiency 
and reduce operational costs. As a result, many financial firms 
have turned to AI to help them stay competitive and achieve 
greater profitability. AI also helps enhance customer service 
through chatbots and virtual assistants, providing quick and 
personalized responses to customer inquiries. Chatbots help 
in improving customer service in addition to cost savings by 
reducing the load from other channels such as contact centres, 
internet banking, etc.

Going ahead, AI is likely to replace traditional models and 
provide real-time data analysis and insights, enabling financial 
institutions to make quicker and more informed decisions. AI-
powered analytics and predictive modelling can help financial 

----

institutions assess risks, identify investment opportunities and 
optimize business strategies.

Further, a renewed thrust will be accorded to Green and 
Sustainable Banking, aiming to direct resources towards 
initiatives that align with Environment, Social and Governance 
(ESG) goals. This will entail a number of collaborations 
and partnerships between banks and renewable-focussed 
companies.

Several partnerships and collaborations between banks and 
Fintech firms are also likely to propel the banking industry’s 
growth. Banking-as-a-Service (BaaS) has enabled fintechs to 
offer the core banking services to their customers. Fintechs 
are able to build products on the back of the legacy banking 
infrastructure and enhance customer experience. Fintechs 
are also acting as a technical partner to banks wherein a bank 
purchases a customised white-label solution from the fintech to 
create a seamless experience for its customers.

Additionally, India has been entering into several economic 
cooperation agreements and trade pacts which are expected 
to provide a major boost to the economy. India recently signed 
a Free Trade agreement (FTA) with the European Free Trade 
Association (EFTA). As per external research, India's imports of 
goods from countries with which it has a free trade agreement 
like the UAE, South Korea and Australia has grown by 38.0 per 
cent from 2019 to 2024 while India’s exports to the FTA partners 
has risen by 14.5 per cent during the same period. This presents 
immense potential for credit growth for the banking sector as 
well.

III.	
Threats

Despite global headwinds, Indian banking sector has displayed 
notable resilience in the last year marked by record levels of 
profitability backed by sustained credit growth and robust 
capital buffers. In 2024, the industry looks forward with cautious 
optimism. Stable interest rates, a strong GDP and decreasing 
inflation are expected to have a positive impact on lending and 
deposit activities. The focus on technology and infrastructure 
investments opens up opportunities for expansion. However, 
certain risks loom on the horizon.

Deposit growth for the banking system is expected to slightly 
moderate to 12-13 per cent in FY 2024-25 from 13.5 per cent 
in FY 2023-24, further intensifying the competition for deposit 
accretion, especially for low-cost Current Account Savings 
Account (CASA) deposits. Deposit accretion at slower pace 
present a challenging scenario and poses a downside risk to 
credit offtake. If the deposit growth is not in line with the credit 
growth, banks may have to borrow from other sources which 
might hit the margins and profitability. 

Deposit growth is expected to continue to lag credit growth that 
is anticipated to remain around 13-15 per cent. The Credit to 
Deposit (CD) ratio has been generally hovering around 80 per 
cent since September 2023. For the fortnight ended 22nd March, 
2024, it stood at 80.3 per cent, reaching a decadal high which 

voljksa dh igpku djus vkSj O;kolkf;d j.kuhfr;ksa dks vuqdwfyr 
djus esa enn dj ldrs gSaA

III-	 ladV

----

is mainly driven by a merger of the big banking entity. This can 
also be seen as increasing lenders’ reliance on bulk deposits if 
growth in granular deposits is slow in picking up. Bulk deposits 
are high cost deposits which are also volatile in nature.

However, PSBs are better placed in terms of deposits, with 
average CD ratio lower than private banks. As a result, select 
private banks are already paying much higher interest for savings 
deposits unlike PSBs, which, being adequately capitalised, are 
better positioned to drive credit growth without the need for 
raising much deposits.

In addition, the rapid improvement in banks’ financial 
metrics, seen over FY 2020-21 to FY 2023-24, is likely to reach 
an inflection point in FY 2024-25, given that net slippages 
continued to decline and credit costs trended lower in  
FY 2023-24. The improving return on assets over FY 2020-21 
to FY 2023-24 is likely to reach an inflection point with some 
pressure on margins.

Banks are likely to witness pressure on their NIM going forward 
due to continued re-pricing of deposit rates. Simultaneously, 
expectations of a rate reversal in the next fiscal could start a 
downward pressure on lending yields and hence, pressure on 
interest margins is likely to continue during FY 2024-25.

Although there is a concern regarding PSB’s asset quality and 
re-emergence of stress scenario, fresh Gross NPA of the banking 
system has been on a downward trend which is expected to 
continue going forward as well. Owing to previous experience, 
reform measures, capex etc. the corporate book asset quality is 
expected to hold up and slippages are likely to remain granular.

Rising global economic uncertainties also pose a significant 
risk for the banking industry. The implications of increasing 
geopolitical instability for banks include heightened risk 
exposure, volatility in financial markets and challenges in 
managing cross-border operations. Any escalation in geopolitical 
conflicts can lead to disruptions in supply chain, contributing 
to inflationary pressures and currency fluctuations. Moreover, 
fluctuations in oil prices, often influenced by geopolitical 
tensions, further compound these challenges for banks, as they 
navigate the implications for industries and regions heavily 
reliant on oil.

Increasing reliance on technology exposes banks to elevated 
cybersecurity risks, necessitating stringent security measures. 
Rapid digitization and deploying emerging technologies like 
Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML) pose several 
risks for the banks such as phishing attacks, data privacy 
concerns, ransomware attacks etc. This, in turn, has implications 
for bank’s reputation and trust with the customers. Banks need 
to invest in infrastructure to make themselves ready to face 
such emerging threats in an increasingly dynamic environment. 

----

Going forward, banks will also face competition from other 
entities including Fintechs, small finance banks, payment banks 
etc. necessitating adaptability and innovation at their end to 
meet the expectations of customers and other stakeholders. 
Changing customer demographics and expectations pose a 
major challenge for banks. Providing excellent service and 
hyper-personalization via improved data analytics will prove to 
be the key to customer retention.  

Finally, unprecedented climate events also pose physical and 
transition risks to the industry. Therefore, banks need to build 
future ready, climate risk-resilient systems to mitigate the 
impact of climate change.

IV.	
Outlook

Bank credit is expected to grow in the range of 13-15 per cent 
year-on-year (YoY), while deposits are expected to grow 12-13 
per cent YoY in FY 2024-25. Deposit growth, although improving 
has lagged credit growth for FY 2023-24 and consequently is 
anticipated to play a leading role in FY 2024-25 as banks take 
further efforts to shore up their liability franchise and ensure 
that lagging deposit growth does not constrain the credit 
offtake. With likely decline in Fixed Deposits rate, deposit base 
is expected to shift towards CASA deposits and banks might see 
healthy uptick in CASA deposits. 

The banking sector is expected to continue its healthy 
performance. Stable interest rates, robust GDP growth and 
declining inflation could positively influence lending and deposit 
activities. The emphasis on technology and infrastructure 
investments creates avenues for further growth in bank credit. 

The corporate lending segment will continue to see a healthy 
pick-up in demand, due to rising working capital requirement 
and a push in both public and private capex. Increase in private 
capex plans is expected to augment banks’ corporate lending 
growth.

Banks’ net interest margins are expected to compress on 
expectations of a rate cut in the second half of FY 2024-25, 
however, benign credit costs and lower operating expenses 
would provide support. Credit growth and profitability metrics 
are expected to continue to remain healthy. 

Going ahead, PSBs are anticipated to report healthy earnings 
growth owing to stable margins, controlled opex, moderate 
treasury gains and benign credit cost. Opex is expected 
to decrease, as wage-related provisions were made in  
Q3 FY 2023-24. Treasury performance is likely to remain robust, 
supported by a decline in bond yields and buoyant capital 
markets. 

Asset quality is showing marked improvement and is likely 
to continue on its downward trajectory. For the nine months 
ended FY 2023-24, the banking industry saw a drop in GNPA to 
1.9 per cent (from 5.4 per cent in FY 2019-20), marking robust 
asset quality improvement. PSBs nearly halved their GNPAs to 

IV-	 vkmVyqd

----

3.7 per cent in 9M FY 2023-24 from 7.4 per cent in FY 2021-22, 
while private banks maintained NPAs below industry average at 
2.0 per cent, indicating improvement in their fiscal health. The 
ongoing improvement in asset quality is expected to continue, 
with controlled slippages, complemented by robust recoveries, 
upgrades and sales to the National Asset Reconstruction 
Company Ltd (NARCL), which will enhance asset quality ratios. 
Healthy PCR and a significant reduction in the SMA pool bode 
well for credit costs.

**V.	
Segment-wise or Product-wise Performance**

	
The performance of major business segments of the Bank is 
analyzed below: 

**1. 
Resource Mobilization**

	
The Domestic deposits of the Bank increased to  
Rs. 13,33,365 Crore as at end of March 2024. Savings 
deposits increased to Rs. 4,80,298 Crore, while CASA 
increased to Rs.  5,52,499 Crore. The share of CASA 
deposit to Domestic deposit stood at 41.44 per cent as at 
end of March 2024.

	
In the current banking scenario of mounting competition, 
Retail banking products play a major role in enhancing 
the business growth of the Bank. In order to remain 
competitive, the Bank has identified anchor products and 
special focus is given to mobilize more business under the 
segment. The deposit under customer specific segment 
viz. PNB Power savings account (for women) increased to 
Rs. 11,840 Crore with a YoY growth of 20 per cent and PNB 
Rakshak increased to Rs. 2,391 Crore with a YoY growth of 
14 per cent.

	
Further, Savings Deposit scheme Unnati has also been 
identified as an anchor product, where the deposit 
increased to Rs. 3,72,747 Crore registering a YoY growth of 
4 per cent.

	
New Schemes in FY 2023-24:

	
Bank has launched following new deposit schemes for 
various segments of the society:

a.	
PNB Expert Current Account Scheme: A segment 
focussed scheme helps the Bank in running 
dedicated marketing campaigns for the targeted 
segment. As such a new Current Account scheme 
for Professionals titled as “PNB Expert Current 
Account (CAEXP)” has been introduced. The scheme 
is a specialized banking offering designed to cater 
to the unique financial needs of professionals such 
as Chartered Accountants, Company Secretaries, 
Doctors, Architects, Lawyers, Cost Accountants, 
Valuers, Interior Designers & Fashion Designers. It 
also becomes easier for the field team to pitch the 
product to the targeted segment as the name of the 
scheme and features are aligned to the customers.

**V-	 [kaM&okj ;k mRikn&okj çn'kZu**

**1-	 lalkèku tqVkuk**

**foÙk o"kZ 2023&24 esa ubZ ;kstuk,a%**

----

b.	
PNB Pragati Current Account Scheme: Aspirational 
customers are being offered the “Pragati Current 
Account Scheme”, curated for the aspirational 
customers whose businesses are growing and they 
are willing to maintain a higher monthly average 
balance to get the benefit of enhanced features and 
freebies in the account that will be suitable for their 
business.

c. 
Current Account Collection scheme: Guidelines 
issued by RBI includes directions for opening of 
collection account by borrowers availing credit 
facilities from banking system. To facilitate this, a 
new product titled “Current Account Collection 
scheme” (CACOL) has been introduced.

d.	
Soundbox for Bharat QR Code (PNB E-Swar):  Bharat 
QR Code is a Quick Response code displayed at 
the merchant location to accept digital payments 
towards sale of goods or services to customers 
through use of mobile applications linked to Debit 
Card/Credit Card & Unified Payments Interface 
(UPI). The Bank has introduced Soundbox device 
(PNB E-Swar) at merchant location where Bharat QR 
codes are issued or required for digital transactions 
which provide immediate audio notification on every 
successful transaction.

e.	
Do-it-Yourself (DIY) journey in Point Of Sale (POS) 
& Bharat QR (BQR) Business:  In order to enhance 
merchant’s banking experience and to speed up the 
merchant onboarding process, Do-it-Yourself journey 
for POS & BQR through PNB ONE application and 
Bank’s corporate website has been introduced. The 
merchant will be able to complete the onboarding 
online without visiting branch and POS/BQR shall be 
installed at merchant location.

**2.	
Credit Deployment and Delivery**

Gross 
Global 
Advances 
of 
the 
Bank 
stood 
at  
Rs. 9,83,325 Crore in March 2024 registering a YoY growth of 
11.15 per cent. Fresh Corporate Sanctions with external rating 
‘A’ and above formed a major part of the sanctions. Similarly, 
Bank has improved its CD Ratio to 71.8 per cent as on 31st 
March, 2024 from 69.1 per cent as on 31st March, 2023.

Two tier organisational structure of Corporate Credit is 
a specialised Credit Delivery Structure equipped with 
dedicated Credit desks ensuring consistent and responsible 
lending practices. The structure is functioning to meet 
the customer expectation by augmenting three pillars 
viz; Customer Ecstasy, Timely delivery and Fair Lending 
Practices. The 2 tier structure is being catered by 2 Extra 
Large Corporate Branches (ELCBs) and 13 Large Corporate 
Branches (LCBs), opened in different parts of the country. 
These 15 ELCBs/LCBs constitute approx. 46.42 per cent of 
total domestic credit.

**2-	 ØsfMV ifjfu;kstu vkSj forj.k**

----

**3.	
Retail Credit**

Retail assets business has witnessed considerable growth 
during past 2-3 years after COVID-19 era. The growth has 
been fuelled by consistent improvement in economic 
condition, rising middle class, urbanization, rising 
disposable income, technical innovation for dissemination 
of product, competitive environment at macro level, 
whereas at micro level, product differentiation, marketing 
strategies, launch of digital channel for retail loan, 
implementation of specialized verticals, cross selling 
opportunities etc. have contributed to the growth story. 
Delinquency in retail assets are under control and receding 
on account of improving credit underwriting standards.

During the FY 2023-24, Total Retail Credit portfolio of the 
Bank increased to Rs. 2,22,574 Crore registering a robust 
YoY growth of 12.6 per cent. Out of this, the Core Retail 
Credit has increased to Rs 1,58,246 Crore in FY 2023-24 
showing a YOY growth of 15.2 per cent.

Further, within the Core Retail Credit portfolio, Housing 
Loan increased to Rs. 93,694 Crore from Rs 81,863 Crore, 
Vehicle loan increased to Rs. 20,692 Crore from Rs. 16,478 
Crore and Personal loan was at Rs. 20,766 Crore from  
Rs. 18,152 Crore registering YOY growth of 14.5 per cent, 
25.6 per cent and 14.4 per cent respectively.

**New Initiatives**

a.	
The Bank is continuously offering competitive 
features as well as rate of interest for various retail 
asset products.

b.	
Focused & dedicated approach to increase portfolio 
of home loan in overall retail asset portfolio has been 
adapted.

c.	
Distinctive approach is being pursued for increasing 
big ticket loan under education loan scheme.

d.	
Increased tie-up and handholding with lead sourcing 
channels such as Car dealers, Home builders, 
Marketing Associate (MA), Marketing Consultant 
(MC), Retail Loan Counsellors (RLC) and usage of 
property search sites has led to uninterrupted flow 
of retail loan leads.

e.	
PNB Cards & Services Limited (PNBCSL), a subsidiary 
of the Bank, has been roped in to source home 
loan, car loan and education loan leads from across 
country and a dedicated centralized PNB Loan Point 
(PLP) has been set up for processing these leads.

f.	
An arrangement with NBFCs has been done to 
venture into business of co-lending under home loan 
(Priority sector).

**3-	 fjVsy _.k**

**ubZ igy]**

**lh- 	f'k{kk _.k ;kstuk ds rgr cM+s _.k dks c<+kus ds fy, 
fof'k"V –f"Vdks.k viuk;k tk jgk gSA**

----

g.	
57 dedicated Customer Acquisition Centers (CACs) 
have been set up across the country for sourcing 
retail loan leads and facilitating tie-up with corporate 
institutions, home builders, etc.

h.	
A new scheme PNB Matritva has been launched for 
providing financial assistance through Personal Loan 
with longer repayment period for working women 
during perinatal period.

**Digital initiatives**

a.	
Digi Home, a digital way of offering home loan 
product, was launched in October 2023. The product 
offers online, paperless and seamless home loan 
digitally.

b.	
PNB Swagat, a digitally available personal loan 
product, was launched in October 2023. It provides 
end to end journey till disbursement for personal 
need to customers, who are new to bank.

c.	
Digi car, again a digital channel for car loan, was 
launched in March 2024 to facilitate customers with 
ease of availing car loan at their convenience.

d.	
An application “PNB Aarambh” was launched to 
facilitate acquiring of customers on-the-go, outside 
branch environment and provisionally offer them 
with Retail Asset Products based on certain minimum 
information given by them.

e.	
A new loan scheme digital personal loan was 
launched for existing customers, who have fully 
repaid Home loan/Car Loan/Education Loan/
Personal Loan.

**4.	
Priority Sector**

	
Shouldering the responsibility of social banking, the Bank 
has surpassed all the Priority Sector (PS) goals this year. As 
per the Economic Survey 2022-23, the agriculture sector 
in India has grown at an average annual growth rate of 
4.6 per cent during the last six years. The Bank has major 
contribution in this development by providing finance to 
the sector.

	
The outstanding position of Priority Sector, Agriculture 
and sub-sectors as on 31st March, 2024 on quarterly 
average basis is as under:

**fMftVy igy**

**4- 	 çkFkfedrk çkIr {ks=**

----

**Achievement of National Goals**

	
                          	
	
(Amount in Rs. Crore)

Sector
No. of 
Beneficiaries 
(Nos.)

31.03.2024
(Amount)
PSL 
Target

% Achievement 
to Adjusted 
Net Bank 
Credit (ANBC)

Priority Sector 
73,96,431
3,33,011
40.00%
40.57%

Out of which:

Agriculture Sector
51,37,208
1,49,925
18.00%
18.27%

Small & Marginal 
farmers
42,19,336
82,808
10.00%
10.09%

Micro entp.
15,26,360
66,943
7.50%
8.16%

Weaker Sections
52,51,053
1,11,402
12.00%
13.57%

**Performance Highlights of FY 2023-24**

a.	
Credit to Priority Sector stood at Rs. 3,33,011 Crore as on March 
2024. The percentage of Priority Sector Advances to ANBC is 40.57 
per cent as against the prescribed National Goal of 40.00 per cent.

b.	
Credit to Agriculture (PS) sector stood at Rs. 1,49,925 Crore 
as on March 2024. The percentage of Agriculture Advances to 
ANBC is 18.27 per cent against the prescribed National Goal of 
18.00 per cent.

c.	
Loans to Small/Marginal Farmers (SF/MF) stood at Rs. 82,808 
Crore as on March 2024. The percentage of advances to SF/
MF farmers to ANBC is 10.09 per cent as against the prescribed 
National Goal of 10.00 per cent.

d.	
Credit to Micro (PS) Enterprises stood at Rs. 66,943 Crore 
as on March 2024. The percentage of advance to Micro (PS) 
Enterprises to ANBC is 8.16 per cent as against the prescribed 
National Goal of 7.50 per cent.

e.	
Advances to Weaker Section stood at Rs. 1,11,402 Crore as 
on March 2024. The achievement is 13.57 per cent as against 
National goal of 12.00 per cent of ANBC.

Government of India is launching various programmes for the 
benefit of farmers from time to time. KCC Saturation campaign 
was launched in February 2020. Govt. of India has also launched 
various schemes under Atma Nirbhar Bharat package in 2020. The 
schemes like Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF), Animal Husbandry 
Infrastructure Development Fund (AHIDF) and Pradhan Mantri 
Formalisation of Micro Food Processing Enterprises Scheme (PMFME) 
has helped Banks in targeting and financing under various activities 
under Farm credit and pre & post-harvest management. Since all 
these schemes are part of Agriculture and priority sector, these have 
helped in achieving Priority Sector targets also. In addition to this 
various other programmes like National Rural Livelihood Mission 
(NRLM), National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM), etc. are also 
helping in increasing the Priority sector advances.

**jk"Vªh; y{;ksa dh çkfIr**

**¼jkf'k #i;s djksM+ esa½**

**{ks=
ykHkkfFkZ;ksa 
dh la[;k 
¼la[;k½**

31.03.2024
¼jkf'k½
çkFkfedrk& 
çkIr {ks=  
dk y{;

ftlesa ls:
—f"k {ks=
51,37,208
1,49,925
18.00%
18.27%
NksVs vkSj 
lhekar fdlku
42,19,336
82,808
10.00%
10.09%

lw{e m|e
15,26,360
66,943
7.50%
8.16%
detksj oxZ
52,51,053
1,11,402
12.00%
13.57%

**foÙk o"kZ 2023&24 dh çn'kZu gkbykbV~l**

----

**Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF)**

To ensure certainty of returns to the farmers through price support, 
promote crop diversification and improve market infrastructure, 
Government is focussing on investment in infrastructure facilities 
through Agriculture Infrastructure Fund.

62,625 projects with aggregate sanction of Rs. 31,270 Crore were 
financed under the scheme, out of which PNB sanctioned 4,728 
projects amounting Rs. 4,458 Crore upto 31st March, 2024.

**Kisan Credit Card Scheme (KCC)**

In order to bring all the farmers under the ambit of availing KCC 
facility, Government of India (GOI) launched KCC-Saturation drive 
w.e.f. 1st February, 2020. The total accounts sanctioned by the Bank 
till 31st March, 2024 under KCC-Saturation is 15,74,093 accounts 
amounting to Rs. 23,751 Crore.

**Strategies to enhance Agriculture Credit**

**a.	
Agriculture Investment Credit**

i.	
Financing Food & Agro processing units like Rice Mills 
(in States like West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Punjab), Dal 
Mills, Atta and Edible Oil (in States like Rajasthan), etc., 
in identified areas based on the geographical potential. 
Further, the Bank is also providing competitive Rate 
of Interest (ROI) using cluster-based methodology for 
specific geographical areas to garner fresh business under 
the segment.

ii.	
Agriculture Infrastructure like Cold storage units, Rural 
Godowns, Warehouses, etc. 

iii.	
Animal Husbandry Infrastructure Development Fund 
(AHIDF): The activities eligible under the scheme includes 
Dairy Processing Units, Meat Processing Units, etc. 

iv.	
Financing under PMFME (PM Formalisation of Micro 
Food Processing Enterprises): Smaller ticket-size advances 
to Micro Enterprises are covered under the scheme.

v.	
Financing under National Livestock Mission (NLM): The 
scheme seeks to achieve employment generation through 
entrepreneurship development in Small Ruminants, 
Poultry and Piggery Sector along with establishment of 
fodder processing units.

**b.	
Agriculture Gold Loan**

i.	
Special Gold loan cell has been formed to exclusively focus 
on increasing Gold loan portfolio.

ii.	
The Bank is exploring Lead generation in Rural areas 
through Business Correspondents (BCs) network.

iii.	
Documentation has been simplified.

iv.	
Centralized follow-up is being done for ensuring availability 
of Gold safe in Authorized branches.

**—f"k volajpuk dks"k ¼,vkbZ,Q½**

**fdlku ØsfMV dkMZ ;kstuk ¼dslhlh½**

**—f"k _.k c<+kus dh j.kuhfr;k¡**

**,-	 —f"k fuos'k _.k**

**ch-	 —f"k Lo.kZ _.k**

iii-	 nLrkost+hdj.k dks ljy cuk;k x;k gSA 

----

v.	
Publicity of Gold loan products from Head Office level in 
different parts of the country.

vi.	
Special focus in 8-9 States in addition to Southern States, 
where potential is more under Gold Loan Segment like 
Rajasthan, Punjab, West Bengal, etc. 

**c.	
Self Help Group (SHG) Financing**

i.	
The Bank is focusing on financing SHGs as per the 
geographical potential where there are more opportunities 
for financing under SHG like Eastern and Southern States.

ii.	
Credit linkage of new eligible groups and providing 
higher dosage to eligible accounts are the focus areas for 
increasing portfolio during FY 2023-24.

iii.	
The Bank has entered into Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) with 8 State Rural Livelihood Missions (SRLMs) for 
lead generation. Further, tie-ups are being explored in 
other States also.

iv.	
The applications of more than Rs. 10.00 Lakh are explored 
to increase the ticket size. 

v.	
Focus will be given to financing of individual women 
member of SHGs in line with Lakhpati Didi initiative.

**Digital Initiatives or Lending through Digital Platform**

i.	
Kisan Tatkal Rinn: It has been made live since 22nd March, 2023 
and Rs. 600 Crore has been sanctioned during the FY 2023-24.

ii.	
Digital Gold Loan: It has been made live since 5th November, 
2023 and Rs. 350 Crore has been disbursed during the  
FY 2023-24. The journey took time to stabilize and the progress 
is expected to pick up during the FY 2024-25.

iii.	
DP Review & Enhancement: This has been made live since 
9th January, 2024 and is expected to pick up during the  
FY 2024-25. However, 548 accounts have been enhanced 
under the journey and more than 75,000 accounts have been 
reviewed. The accounts with correct Mobile number fed in the 
system and where disbursed amount including applied interest 
is repaid within a year of the disbursement are eligible for DP 
enhancement.

**Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Activities**

a.	
Farmers Training Centres (FTCs): The Bank has established 
12 Farmers Training Centres. FTCs provide training on 
agriculture & allied activities which include organic farming, 
fertilizer management, bee keeping, dairy farming, mushroom 
production, maintenance of tractor and other farm machineries, 
processing and preservation of fruits and vegetables, computer 
courses, beauty parlour, candle and soap making, papad 

**lh- 	Lo;a lgk;rk lewg ¼,l,pth½ foÙkiks"k.k**

iv-	 _.k ds vkdkj dks c<+kus ds fy, 10-00 yk[k #i;s ls vfèkd 
ds vkosnuksa dk irk yxk;k tk jgk gSA 

**fMftVy igy ;k fMftVy IysVQ‚eZ ds ekè;e ls _.k nsuk**

**d‚ikZsjsV lkekftd mÙkjnkf;Ro ¼lh,lvkj½ xfrfofèk;k¡**

----

making, making of soft toys, cutting, tailoring & embroidery, etc. 
These Training Centres have been equipped with the Mobile 
Van having Soil testing facilities at the farmers’ fields and LED 
for audio visual display of informative video clips to the farmers. 
The Bank spent Rs. 446 Lakh under this during FY 2023-24. Since 
inception, FTCs have imparted training to 18,28,024 persons by 
conducting 61,555 training programs.

b.	
Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs): There are 
78 RSETIs under aegis of Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) 
and 2 Rural Development Centres (PNB initiatives) operating 
in India which are engaged in providing training to rural 
population and their families for skill upgradation to undertake 
self-employment ventures/jobs. During the FY 2023-24, 60,721 
persons were trained in these centers out of which 47,911 
belong to Below Poverty Line (BPL) families and 47,899 were 
women. Total number of trained candidates since inception 
is 6,02,566 out of which 2,91,211 were from BPL families and 
4,04,491 were women. Our RSETIs are focusing for settlement 
of participants by ensuring adequate credit for inclusive growth. 
Total settled candidates are 4,14,042 since inception. The Bank 
spent Rs. 3,857 Lakh under this during FY 2023-24.

----

c.	
Financial Literacy Centres: The Bank has 175 Financial Literacy 
Centers (FLCs). Total number of enquiries made during the period 
from 1st April, 2023 to 31st March, 2024 is 1,87,255. The Target 
groups of the programmes conducted by FLCs are Farmers, Self 
Help Groups, Micro and Small Entrepreneurs, Senior Citizens 
etc. Total number of seminars/programmes/camps conducted 
by FLCs on Financial Education, Preventive Counselling and 
Customer Rights from 1st April, 2023 to 31st March, 2024 is 8,072 
and number of persons attended these programs are 2,95,558.

**5.	
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME)**

The MSME sector forms the backbone of our industrial sector 
and is an important growth engine for the economy that 
promotes entrepreneurship, inspires innovation and boosts 
employment generation.

As at the end of the March 2024, credit to MSME segment 
stands at Rs. 1,39,288 Crore. The advance to Micro and Small 
Enterprises stood at Rs. 1,13,336 Crore.

The Bank has disbursed Rs. 21,475 Crore in FY 2023-24 under 
the Pradhan Mantri MUDRA Yojana (PMMY) as against Rs. 
20,367 Crore in FY 2022-23. 

**a. 
Details of initiatives being taken to boost MSME business**

i.	
Cluster Based Financing: The Bank has adopted 
Cluster based lending approach and 58 clusters have 
already been approved with customized schemes 
having concessional pricing, service charges, relaxed 
lending norms etc. As on 31st March, 2024 total 939 
accounts of Rs. 2,795 Crore has been sanctioned.

ii.	
Partnership-led growth: The Bank is endeavouring to 
increase market presence and expand the outreach 
through entering into partnership agreement with 
different market players. The details are mentioned 
below:

•	
Tie-Ups with OEMs (Original Equipment 
Manufacturers) for Commercial Vehicle/
Construction Equipment (CV/CE): The Bank 
has tie-up arrangement with 20 reputed 
Commercial Vehicle/Construction Equipment 
Manufacturers to position the Bank as preferred 
financier. Further, the Bank is under process 
of having more such tie up arrangements. 
3,972 accounts for Rs. 254 Crore have been 
sanctioned under Tie-Ups with OEMs for 
Commercial Vehicle & Commercial Equipment 
(CV/CE) as on 31st March, 2024.

•	
Tie-up 
arrangement 
for 
Supply 
Chain 
financing to the dealers of RMCs (Reputed 
Manufacturing 
Companies): 
The 
Bank 
has made tie up arrangement with major 
corporates namely, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, 
Ashok Leyland Limited, Action Construction 
Equipment Limited (ACEL), Patanjali Ayurveda 

**5-	 lw{e] y?kq vkSj eè;e m|e ¼,e,l,ebZ½**

**,-	 ,e,l,ebZ O;olk; dks c<+kok nsus ds fy, dh tk jgh 
igy dk fooj.k**

----

Ltd, 
Daimler 
India 
Commercial 
Vehicle 
Limited, Steel Authority of India Limited and 
Volvo Eicher Commercial Vehicles Limited. 
As on 31st March, 2024, 1,771 accounts for  
Rs. 1,542 Crore have been sanctioned. Further, 
the Bank is under the process of entering into 
more such tie ups.

•	
Tie-up with Fin-Tech Companies: For end-to-
end lending (sourcing to collection & recovery), 
the Bank has Tie-up with M/s Integra Micro 
System Pvt. Ltd for PM SVANidhi.

iii.	
Lending through TreDS Platform: The Bank is 
using all the three platform of TReDS i.e. (1) RXIL  
(2) M1xchange & (3) A.TReDS. TReDS is an 
institutional mechanism set up for financing of 
trade receivables of MSMEs from corporate and 
other buyers including Government Departments 
and Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs). Centralized 
Hub at Delhi has been established to undertake 
operations on TReDS platform effectively. A total of 
2,141 bills amounting to Rs. 981 Crore is outstanding 
on Treds as on 31st March, 2024.

iv.	
Cash Flow based Financing - GST Express: The 
scheme provides hassle free credit to meet working 
capital requirement to GST registered business 
enterprises. Unique feature of the scheme is that 
there is no requirement of submitting financial 
statements and the quantum of loan permitted is 
from Rs. 10 Lakh to Rs. 500 Lakh. 13,992 accounts 
for Rs. 8,602 Crore is sanctioned under the scheme 
as on 31st March, 2024.

v.	
e-GST: The module is a near to Straight Through 
Process (STP) product having loan amount from 
Rs. 10 Lakh to 1 Crore, wherein Cash Credit Facility 
shall be allowed based on 25 per cent of the sales 
reported in the GST returns (GSTR-3B) or the trade 
related credit summation in current accounts in the 
last one year, whichever is lower. As on 31st March, 
2024, number of accounts were 278, and sanctioned 
amount was Rs 69.37 Crore.

vi.	
PNB Tatkal: The scheme provides hassle free 
credit from Rs. 1 Lakh to Rs. 25 Lakh to meet 
financial requirements related to business activity 
or expansion of business wherein proposals are 
invariably routed through pslbloansin59minutes.
com portal and borrower gets In-Principle sanction 
in 59 minutes.

	
2,054 accounts for Rs. 328 Crore has been sanctioned 
under the scheme as on 31st March, 2024.

**31 ekpZ] 2024 rd bl ;kstuk ds rgr 2]054 [kkrksa esa 
328 djksM+ #i;s Loh—r fd, x, gSaA**

----

vii.	 MSME Prime Plus: A flag ship scheme under the 
name of MSME Prime Plus has been launched by 
consolidating four MSME schemes namely, PNB 
Udyog Scheme, PNB Seva Scheme, PNB Vyapar 
Scheme and PNB Contractor Scheme.

	
To be more competitive and acceptable in the 
market, the Bank is offering:

a.	
Concessional Rate of Interest and Service 
Charges; 

b.	
Relaxed collateral norms and margin criteria;

c.	
Features like MSME Vishesh (Auto increase of 
Working Capital Limits);

d.	
Open Term Loan (A pre-approved term loan 
facility which provides flexibility to the existing 
units enjoying credit facilities from the Bank); 
and 

e.	
Car Loan in the name of Firm/Company for 
personal use;                                                                                                 

	
As on 31st March, 2024, 26,776 accounts for  
Rs. 40,693 Crore has been sanctioned under the scheme.

viii.	 Pre-Approved Business Loan (PABL): This module is 
a straight through digital lending to MSME segment 
to provide loan facility from Rs.1 Lakh to Rs. 10 
Lakh under Business loan to those customers who 
are maintaining current account with the Bank and 
it is completely system driven. Loan assessment 
is based on Trade Related Credits (TRC) arrived in 
current accounts through credit summation in last 
12 months and the PABL Score. Keeping in view of 
the success of Pre-Approved Personal Loan (PAPL), 
it is expected to garner a good number of business 
under this module.

	
As on 31st March, 2024, number of accounts were 
11,199 and sanctioned amount was Rs 653.44 Crore.

ix.	
e-RENEWAL Scheme: To increase efficiency of the 
appraisal process, reduce Turn Around Time (TAT) 
and to provide ease to small borrowers, e-RENEWAL 
Scheme has been implemented. It is a process of 
automatic renewal of working capital limit having 
exposure up to Rs. 10 Lakh. 

	
Further, a functionality of STP of Easy renewal has 
been implemented where customer will give his/her 
consent through SMS only and the entire journey 
will be completed digitally without any Branch 
involvement.

	
During the FY 2023-24, a total of 68,862 accounts of 
Rs. 2,944 Crore were renewed.

x.	
PNB e- Mudra Scheme: To meet out credit need of 
the Micro and Small entrepreneur through Digital 

**,- 	fj;k;rh C;kt nj vkSj lsok 'kqYd(**

**lh-	,e,l,ebZ fo'ks"k ¼dk;Z'khy iwath lhek esa Lor% 
	 o`f)½ tSlh fo'ks"krk,a(**

**bZ-	O;fäxr mi;ksx ds fy, QeZ@daiuh ds uke ij  
	 dkj _.k(**

**31 ekpZ] 2024 rd] ;kstuk ds rgr 26]776 [kkrksa esa 
40]693 djksM+ #i;s Loh—r fd, x, gSaA**

----

platform, a straight through process, e-Mudra 
Scheme for loan up to Rs. 1,00,000 has been 
implemented and made live on 4th March, 2023. 
The module is rule based processing & sanctioning, 
which is completely system driven.

	
As on 31st March, 2024, number of accounts were 
11,278 and sanctioned amount was Rs 108.17 Crore.

xi.	
Extensive use of PNB LenS: The Bank had developed/
customized Information Technology (IT) based 
solution i.e. PNB LenS – The Lending Solution for 
loan management. After implementation of Loan 
Management System (LMS), assessment process 
is standardized which has strengthened the credit 
underwriting. Now, the module for processing of the 
application under Mudra and MSME loans (fresh/
renewal/enhancement/review) upto Rs. 25 Crore 
are available through PNB LenS. Total 3,47,360 
applications (MSME + Mudra) have been sanctioned, 
amounting Rs. 85,225 Crore from 1st April, 2023 to 
31st March, 2024.

**b.	
Government Sponsored Schemes**

	
Special economic and comprehensive package of 
Rs. 20 Lakh Crore to fight COVID-19 pandemic in India was 
announced by Hon’ble Prime Minister under the ‘Aatma 
Nirbhar Bharat Abhiyan’. To provide relief to stressed 
sectors by helping sustaining the employment and meet 
liabilities, the Bank has taken various initiatives to enable 
MSMEs to promptly address their business continuity 
and remain firmly on their feet during the crisis and also 
enable them to move forward in its aftermath, such as:

i.	
PM Street Vendor's Atma Nirbhar Nidhi (PM 
SVANidhi): This is a Central Government Scheme 
launched by Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
formalized for Street vendors providing finance upto 
Rs 10,000 which opened up new opportunities for 
this section to move up the economic ladder. The 
scheme was launched on 2nd July, 2020 and it is 
available to all street vendors engaged in urban areas 
as on or before 24th March, 2020. Lending under the 
PM SVANidhi Scheme is extended till December 
2024. Credit Guarantee and interest Subsidy claims 
on all loans will be paid till March 2028.

	
In addition to this, Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs has extended the benefit of existing scheme 
to provide enhanced loan (2nd tranche of Rs. 20,000 
and 3rd tranche of Rs. 50,000) to PM SVANidhi 
beneficiaries on timely repayment of earlier loan 
under PM SVANidhi Scheme. 

	
As on 31st March, 2024, a total of 6,85,439 
applications have been sanctioned out of which 
6,45,708 (94.20 per cent) have been disbursed.

**ch- 	ljdkj }kjk çk;ksftr ;kstuk,¡**

----

	
e-PM SVANidhi - To make the PM SVANidhi loan 
more flexible and easily accessible to all eligible urban 
street vendors, ‘e-PM SVANidhi’ scheme is launched 
for all applicants who are having KYC complied saving 
and current account with the Bank based on Aadhar/
Pan available in Core Banking System (CBS). Under the 
scheme, the loan is sanctioned without any manual 
intervention and the amount is disbursed directly into 
the Savings/Current account of the borrower. The 
scheme was made live on 24th August, 2023. As on 31st 
March, 2024, number of accounts were 29,286 and 
sanctioned amount was Rs 29.81 Crore.

ii.	
Contactless loan through Psbloansin59minutes.
com: A portal for in-principle approval for MSME 
loans upto Rs. 5 Crore within 59 minutes is in place 
in the name of psbloansin59minutes.com. The Bank 
has on-boarded this portal and it has been made 
live. Further, the Bank has also on-boarded Mudra 
loans on the Mudra Portal launched by M/s Online 
PSB Loans Ltd. The Bank has already configured all 
flagship MSME products on this portal to maximize 
in-principle sanctions.

	
As on 31st March, 2024, total of 90,856 applications 
were disposed of, out of 93,847 applications received 
for MSME & MUDRA loans.

**c.	
Awards received during the quarter**

i.	
MSME Banking Excellence Award 2023 ceremony 
organized by Chamber of Indian Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (CIMSME), New Delhi: Punjab 
National Bank has been awarded as Best MSME 
friendly Bank & Runner Up in Best Bank for creating 
Awareness in MSME Banking Excellence Award 2023 
Ceremony organized by Chamber of Indian Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises (CIMSME), New 
Delhi.

**6.	
Financial Inclusion (FI)**

	
The Bank has been the pioneer in taking initiative in the 
area of financial inclusion. The Bank is providing Business 
Correspondents (BCs) services since 2012 & implementing 
comprehensive Financial Inclusion Program through effective 
utilization of BCs in Sub Service Area (SSA) & non SSA area. SSA 
is a cluster of few villages and is linked to one base branch of the 
Bank.

	
Some of the FI initiatives include:

a.	
The Bank has implemented Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan 
Yojana (PMJDY) and other financial inclusion initiatives 
through BCs pan-India. Overdraft facility up to Rs. 10,000 
in PMJDY accounts is provided to eligible account holders 
(age group 18-65).

**lh- 	frekgh ds nkSjku çkIr iqjLdkj**

**6- 	 foÙkh; lekos'ku ¼FI½**

	
FI dh dqN igyksa esa 'kkfey gSa%

----

b.	
Biometric based e-KYC account opening and Aadhar 
seeding at BC Locations.

c.	
Social security schemes, i.e. Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti 
Bima Yojana (PMJJBY), Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima 
Yojana (PMSBY) and Atal Pension Yojana (APY) facilities, 
are available at BC locations, branches, as well as through 
Internet Banking/Mobile Banking. The Progress of Social 
Security Schemes till 31st March, 2024 is as under:

i.	
PMJJBY: 63.82 Lakh customers enrolled.

ii.	
PMSBY: 254.54 Lakh customers enrolled.

iii.	
APY: 38.53 Lakh customers enrolled.

	
As on 31st March, 2024, Bank has 33,614 BC Agents/Bank 
Mitras providing basic banking services in Rural, Semi-Urban, 
Urban and Metro centres depending upon the requirement 
of the Bank. The BC Agents/Bank Mitras use PAX/Laptop/
Desktop/Mobile/Tab etc. for providing the banking services. At 
present, following services as per EASE agenda of Department 
of Financial Services (DFS) is available at BC locations through 
Kiosk Banking Solution:

a.	
Savings Account Opening

b.	
Term Deposit Receipt (TDR)/ Recurring Deposit (RD) 
opening, Renew TD/RD

c.	
Cash Deposit (own bank)

d.	
Cash Withdrawal (on us), Cash withdrawal (off us)

e.	
Fund transfer (own bank), Fund transfer (other Bank—
Aadhaar Enabled Payment System (AEPS)/RuPay card)

f.	
Immediate Payment Service (IMPS), National Electronic 
Funds Transfer (NEFT), Indo-Nepal Remittance

g.	
Balance enquiry (own bank), Balance enquiry (other bank)

h.	
Apply for RuPay debit cards, Block debit card

i.	
Enroll for social security schemes i.e. micro accidental 
death insurance (PMSBY), micro life insurance (PMJJBY), 
pension scheme (APY)

j.	
Aadhaar seeding

k.	
Self Help Group (SHG): For formation & promotion, 
including credit linkage

l.	
Passbook update, Mini statement

m.	
Cheque collection

n.	
Request new cheque book, Stop payment of cheque, 
Cheque status enquiry

o.	
Request for SMS alert / email statement (registered 
mobile number/e-mail).

i-	
ih,etstschokbZ% 63-82 yk[k xzkgd ukekafdrA 

ii-	
ih,e,lchokbZ% 254-54 yk[k xzkgd ukekafdrA 

iii-	 ,ihokbZ% 38-53 yk[k xzkgd ukekafdrA

**,-	
cpr [kkrk [kksyuk**

**lh-	 udn tek ¼viuk cSad½**

**Mh-	 udn fudklh ¼gekjs lkFk½] udn fudklh ¼gels vyx½**

**ts-	 vkèkkj lhfMax**

**,y-	 iklcqd viMsV] feuh LVsVesaV**

**,e-	 psd dysD'ku**

**,u-	 ubZ psd cqd dk vuqjksèk djsa] psd dk Hkqxrku jksdsa] tkap dh 
fLFkfr dh tkap djsa**

**vks-	 ,l,e,l vyVZ@bZesy fooj.k ¼iath—r eksckby uacj@
bZ&esy½ ds fy, vuqjksèkA**

----

p.	
Recovery/Collection up to bank approved limits.

q.	
Loan request initiation for Retail/Mudra/Agriculture 

r.	
Request initiation for Current account opening 

s.	
Request initiation for Third Party Products

**VI.	
Risks & Concerns**

	
Risk is an integral part of the Bank’s business operations. The 
Bank is exposed to major risks namely credit risk, market risk, 
operational risk, liquidity risk, interest rate risk, among others 
and has put in place measures, policies, systems and procedures 
to manage and mitigate those risks. The Bank also has a reliable 
internal controlling environment to manage materials risks such 
as Reputational risk, Strategic Risk, IT Risk, Cyber Risk, Compliance 
Risk, ESG Risk, Climate Risk, Conduct Risk and other residual risks. 
The Board of Directors of the Bank has constituted various Sub-
Committees of Board and/or Functional Committees to look into 
different areas of strategic importance.

**1.	
Credit Risk Management**

	
The Bank has a robust Credit Risk management framework 
and has developed comprehensive risk scoring/rating 
system that serves as a single point indicator of diverse 
risk factors of counterparties for taking credit decisions 
in a consistent manner. The Bank has in-house credit 
risk rating models for risk assessment of borrowers and 
has also developed and implemented scoring models 
for Retail advances, MSME and Farm sector advances. In 
addition, the Bank has developed separate credit scoring 
models to capture the peculiarity of specific lending 
schemes designed for a particular segment such as PNB 
Sampatti, PNB GST express loan, Pre-Approved Personal 
Loan scheme, e-Mudra and lending under co-lending 
arrangements with NBFCs.

	
The Bank undertakes periodic validation exercise of its 
credit risk rating and scoring models to ensure their 
efficacy. The Bank also conducts migration and default rate 
analysis to test robustness of its credit risk rating models. 
Output of credit rating and scoring models is linked to 
decision making which includes credit sanctioning, pricing, 
loaning powers alongside audit, review & monitoring of 
credit portfolio. The Bank has put in place several policies 
covering various aspects of credit risk management to 
have a uniform set of effective lending practices.

	
In pursuance of overarching objective of automation 
of processes and increased compliance, the Bank has 
launched various digital retail lending products targeting 
different customer segments. These products are based 
on rule-based, system driven processing & sanctioning, 
which shall be end-to-end or near end-to-end. Separate 
scorecards have been developed to assess the risks for 
these products.

**ih-	 cSad }kjk vuqeksfnr lhek rd olwyh@dysD'ku A**

**D;w-	 [kqnjk@eqæk@—f"k ds fy, _.k vuqjksèk vkjaHk**

**vkj-	pkyw [kkrk [kksyus ds fy, vuqjksèk vkjaHk djsa**

**,l-	 rhljs i{k ds mRiknksa ds fy, vuqjksèk vkjaHk djsa**

**VI- 	tksf[ke vkSj fpark,¡**

**1-	 ØsfMV tksf[ke çcaèku**

----

The Bank has also launched E-Renewal Scheme, an 
automatic/Straight Through Process (STP) for renewal of 
credit facilities for working capital credit facilities having 
exposure up to a certain threshold.

The Bank has in place a fully digitized and automated Early 
Warning monitoring tool ‘PNB SAJAG 2.0’ for effective 
monitoring of advances above Rs. 1 Crore and early 
detection of deterioration in health of loan accounts. The 
system monitors the accounts on 133 Early Warning Signals 
(EWS) - including all EWS prescribed by Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI) and Department of Financial Services (DFS).

The Bank has established a separate Industry Research 
Desk under Credit Intelligence and Support Department 
(CIaSD), which carries out in-house risk assessment of 
industries and prepares industry outlook for more than 
150 industries based on calculated industry risk scores. 
Output of industry risk assessment exercise is translated 
into Industry Handout which presents executive summary 
and brief of various industry risk parameters. Further, 
'Up', 'Stable' and 'Down’ trends in Industry Outlook is also 
provided by encapsulating significant developments in 
industries during the quarter.

A dedicated Market Intelligence Unit has been created 
under Credit Intelligence and Support Department 
(CIaSD). The unit provides Market Intelligence Report on 
different classes of borrowers above certain threshold.

These processes help to achieve quick & accurate delivery 
and monitoring of credit, bring uniformity in the appraisal 
and facilitate storage of data & analysis thereof.

2.	
Market risk and Asset Liability Management

The Bank has in place a well-defined organizational 
structure for market risk management which looks into 
the process of overall management of market risk viz. 
interest rate risk, equity price risk and foreign exchange 
risk and implements methodologies for measuring and 
monitoring the risks to keep the investment portfolio 
healthy and liquid.

Mid-office of Treasury Operations, looks after market 
risk of the investment Portfolio of the Bank and reports 
to Group Chief Risk Officer (GCRO) to ensure the 
independence of its functioning from treasury operations. 
Further, Market Risk Management Committee (MRMC) a 
functional committee of the Bank, is also in place to look 
after the overall management of Market Risk.

Mid Office monitors various risk positions through 
statistical tools like VaR, stress tests, risk limits like 
M-Duration, PV01, exposure limit etc. to effectively 
manage the Investment portfolio. In order to make the 
monitoring robust and system driven, tools/limits have 
been automated in Finacle treasury application for better 
monitoring and management of Market Risk. Further, in 

2-	 cktkj tksf[ke vkSj vkfLr ns;rk çcaèku

----

order to incorporate the impact of riskiness of exposure 
in different countries, Country Risk Premium has been 
incorporated in the pricing structure for effective pricing.

The Bank has a separate Asset Liability Management Cell 
that manages and monitors liquidity risk and interest 
rate risk proactively. To assess liquidity risk for short term 
resilience, the Bank computes and monitors Liquidity 
Coverage Ratio (LCR) on daily basis. For long term 
resilience, the Bank computes and monitors Net stable 
Funding Ratio (NSFR) on monthly basis.

The Bank keeps a close eye on development in the global 
markets and scans its portfolio on regular basis to protect 
itself from similar kind of risk incidents. The Bank carries 
out detailed stress testing for liquidity risk on quarterly 
basis. Stress test is a tool that helps in assessing the Bank’s 
liquidity profile and the adequacy of liquidity buffers in 
case of bank-specific, market-wide and combined stress 
events. Stress test is conducted using severe but plausible 
scenarios and its impact on liquidity position is assessed 
under low, medium and high stress scenarios. Similarly, 
the Bank also conducts liquidity stress test and impact 
on LCR, followed by preparation of Contingency Funding 
Plan to tide over liquidity crunch if at all it arises. The 
Bank manages its assets on a continuous basis in a way to 
withstand liquidity requirements at all times.

The Bank also computes and report Interest Rate Risk in 
Banking Book (IRRBB) to RBI on quarterly basis. IRRBB 
refers to current and prospective risk to bank’s capital and 
earnings arising from adverse movement in interest rates 
that affects its banking book position.

3. 
Operational Risk Management

Bank has in place a well-defined organizational structure 
and framework for operational risk management 
functions. The Bank is identifying, measuring, monitoring 
and controlling/mitigating the operational risk through 
tools viz. Internal/External Loss Data, Near Miss Events, 
Risk Control & Self-Assessment surveys (RCSAs), Key 
Risk Indicators (KRIs), Risk Based Assessment for Money 
Laundering & Terrorist Financing Risk and Scenario 
Analysis. The Bank has a robust mechanism in place to 
analyse the operational risk in product/activities/process 
and systems before introducing/modifying existing 
processes through approvals at various levels. The Bank 
has in place sound and responsive practices to ensure 
effective oversight, due diligence and management of risk 
arising from outsourcing of financial services along with 
Business Continuity Plan that leads to readiness in tackling 
serious business disruption. The Bank has implemented 
Statistical Analysis Software (SAS), an online Operational 
Risk Solution under Enterprise wide Data Warehouse 

3-	 ifjpkykukRed tksf[ke çcaèku

----

Project and placed it on central server to take care of various 
aspects of data capturing and management information 
system at various levels to provide technological support 
for managing entire Operational Risk of the Bank.

The Bank has newly established IT and Information 
Security Risk Management vertical under risk function 
for effective IT and information security risk management 
bank wide.

4.	
Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP) & 
Stress Testing

The Bank has in place a comprehensive policy on Internal 
Capital Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP), which is 
reviewed annually and ICAAP document is put up to the 
Board on half yearly basis. ICAAP addresses both the 
Pillar-I and Pillar-II risks and to have a holistic view of 
impact of various risks which the Bank is exposed to, and 
an exercise is carried out to quantify/assess all such risks. 
The risk management processes are covered at length in 
the ICAAP document. The document is prepared on both 
solo and consolidated basis at the group level. 

The Bank also has put in place comprehensive Policy 
on Stress Test to identify the vulnerabilities and assess 
capital/liquidity requirements under adverse but plausible 
scenarios. Stress tests are conducted across whole gamut 
of risks namely Credit risk, Market risk, Operational risk, 
Concentration risk, IRRBB, Liquidity risk, Country risk, 
Group risk, Pension Obligation risk, etc. on a regular 
basis. The Bank has recently upgraded the stress testing 
framework to make the estimates more accurate, forward 
looking and granular. The retail and MSME portfolios have 
been further segregated into 1,000+ risk homogeneous 
micro clusters (based on account characteristics, 
demographics etc.) and linked with macro-economic 
variables.

5. 
Risk Appetite Framework

The Bank has a comprehensive Risk Appetite Framework in 
place. The Framework sets out the Risk Appetite Statement 
along with governance and monitoring mechanism for its 
effective implementation within the Bank. Risk Appetite 
has been defined in terms of different key risk parameters 
along with the Risk limit and Risk threshold level for each 
parameter. Actual risk levels are monitored against the 
approved limits on an ongoing basis.

6.	
Group Risk

Risk Management at Group Level is to manage the risks 
of the Bank as part of the group and assess the potential 
impact of other group entities on the overall risk profile of 
the Bank. The Bank has group risk governance framework/
structure which is based on pyramid approach, starting 

4-	 vkarfjd iwath i;kZIrrk vkdyu çfØ;k ¼vkbZlh,,ih½ 
vkSj ncko ijh{k.k

5-	 tksf[ke {kerk <kapk

----

with Group Risk Policy at top and progressing through risk 
appetite, governance, processes and risk reporting. The 
Bank has formed a Group Risk Management Committee for 
effective management of group risk. The Bank has a strong 
Group Risk oversight of all the group entities, including the 
group risk assessment of Subsidiaries, Associates and Joint 
Venture (JVs), Impact of stress testing of subsidiaries and 
overseas branches on consolidated level, Liquidity Risk 
Management through Group Liquidity Coverage Ratio 
(LCR), Consolidated Prudential Report (CPR), Prudential 
limit and Contingency Funding Plan (CFP). Further Group 
ICAAP is prepared to assess the various risks (both Pillar I 
and Pillar II) the group is exposed to, mitigation of these 
risks and to arrive at an internally computed level of 
capital adequacy consistent with these risks.

7.	
Climate Risk

Climate-related risks refer to the potential risks that may 
arise from climate change or from efforts to mitigate 
climate change, their related impact and the economic 
and financial consequences. It can impact the financial 
sector through two broad channels i.e., physical risks and 
transition risks: a) Physical Risk refers to the economic 
costs and financial losses resulting from the increasing 
frequency and severity of extreme climate change-related 
weather events, longer-term gradual shifts of the climate 
and indirect effects of climate change such as loss of 
ecosystem services b) Transition Risk refers to the risks 
arising from the process of adjustment towards a low-
carbon economy. To accelerate work towards Climate Risk 
Management, a dedicated 'Climate Risk Management Cell' 
is formed. For active management of climate risk, the Bank 
has put in place an implementation plan and components 
which are targeted for development through these 
action areas which are as follows: a) Net Zero Ambition, 
b) Risk Management, c) Operations and d) Climate Risk 
Governance. 

Further, Sustainability and Resilience Committee (SARC) is 
formed for facilitating governance of sustainability related 
activities. The Bank has put in place Green Deposit Policy 
and has also framed Financing Framework for Green, 
Social and Sustainability Linked Activities/Projects which 
has been externally reviewed by third party.

The Bank has developed in-house capabilities for 
effectively managing climate risks. The Bank has done 
physical risk assessment of the entire portfolio for 
assessing the vulnerability of its assets. The Bank has 
also carried out transition risk assessment of borrowers 
by capturing carbon emissions data (including Scope 1 
& Scope 2 emissions). The Bank has in place framework 
on Greenhouse Gas (GHG) measurement based on 
GHG protocol and methodology for Financed emissions 
computation based on Partnership for Carbon Accounting 
Financials (PCAF) standards. Further, the Bank is preparing 
to disclose on CDP Platform from FY 2023-24 onwards. The 

----

Bank has also formulated a qualitative climate risk strategy 
taking into account the best practices related to climate 
risk management. The Bank has also put in place Climate 
Risk Stress Testing Methodology. Bank is in the process 
of developing Environmental, Social and Governance 
(ESG) Rating Model which will be used to take informed 
decisions, once sufficient evidence is in place. Capacity 
building with respect to climate risk is being carried out at 
various levels of the Bank on an ongoing basis. 

However, many constraints are also faced, such as low 
availability of India specific data, absence of Indian 
Taxonomy, insufficient evidence to assess the viability and 
returns potential of Green sectors, etc.

Regulatory Guidelines

The Bank has adopted Standardized Approach for Credit Risk, 
Standardized Duration Approach for Market Risk and Basic 
Indicator Approach for Operational Risk for computation of Risk 
Weighted Assets (RWA) under Basel III norms. 

The Bank also plans to migrate to advanced approaches for 
computation of RWA/Capital charge for Credit, Market and 
Operational Risks subject to approval from the regulator. The 
Bank is calculating & reporting its capital and RWA as per 
Foundation Internal Ratings Based (FIRB) to RBI on quarterly 
basis. The Bank has submitted a formal Letter of Intent for 
adoption of Advanced Internal Rating Based (AIRB) Approach for 
Credit Risk and Internal Models Approach (IMA) for Market risk. 
Necessary actions required in this regard have been initiated.

The Bank is calculating Expected Credit Loss (ECL) as per Indian 
Accounting Standard (Ind AS)-109 on quarterly basis and the 
results are submitted to RBI in prescribed Proforma on half-
yearly basis.

The Bank has developed Risk Adjusted Return on Capital 
(RAROC) framework which provides the Bank with a single 
scale for comparing the return on capital for a credit proposal 
to enable credit decisions. The framework helps in assessing 
whether returns generated by the business proposition are 
commensurate with the risk perceived, thereby maximizing the 
value of shareholder’s equity.

VII.	 Cyber Security Centre of Excellence (CCoE)

The inception of CCoE (Cyber Security Centre of Excellence) in 
April 2023 signifies a pivotal step towards bolstering our cyber 
security framework and operational efficiency. Situated at the 
Bank’s Data Center, CCoE oversees a suite of over 30 security 
technology products, aligning with RBI Circular guidelines and 
industry best practices. The CSOC (Cyber Security Operation 
Centre) ensures real-time monitoring of cyber security and 
network devices, employing advanced correlation rules and 
alerts to detect anomalies promptly.

fofu;ked fn'kkfunZs'k

VII-	 lkbcj lqj{kk mR—"Vrk dsaæ ¼lhlhvksbZ½

----

**Cyber Security Setup:**

1.	
The Bank has implemented the latest technology security 
solutions to safeguard against external threats through robust 
measures taken for perimeter, end point and server security.

2.	
The Bank has collaborated with renowned vendors for 
attack surface monitoring to bolster resilience against 
threats.

3.	
Threat Intel Feed from various sources has been 
implemented to identify and counteract potential cyber 
threats effectively.

4.	
The Bank conducts Red Team Exercises to evaluate and 
improve cyber defense mechanisms, including public-
facing assessments, phishing simulations and readiness 
for ransomware and malware attacks.

	
In the upcoming year, the Bank plans to implement 
modern security solutions. Adherence to best practices 
includes periodic upgrades of perimeter devices and 
leveraging existing hardware capacities for a robust cyber 
environment. 

	
By consolidating these initiatives under the Cyber Security 
Centre of Excellence, the Bank aims to cultivate a strong cyber 
security culture and proactively mitigate emerging threats.

**VIII.	 Physical Security**

	
The Bank has well established security and fire safety set-up with 
clear-cut delegation of authority and responsibility to the Security 
Organization functioning at Head Office and at the field level. 

	
Security Organization functions through various instructions/
guidelines which are consolidated in the form of Physical 
Security Policy and Fire Safety Policy. Security Organization 
ensures physical safeguarding of the Bank’s asset, its fire safety 
arrangements and safety of its staff/customers.

	
All the Bank’s branches are strengthened with the latest security 
and fire safety gadgets such as Closed-Circuit Television (CCTV) 
System with 90 days recording, Burglar Alarm System, Fire 
Alarm System, auto dialers, Passive Infrared (PIR) sensors, light 
sensors, portable fire extinguishers, modular fire extinguishers 
etc. Furthermore, Branches dealing with locker facility are 
strengthened with additional CCTV cameras and hard disc with 
a provision to store CCTV recording till 180 days. 

	
The Bank has a system of guarding all the branches as per 
their Physical Security Risk profile categorized into High Risk, 
Medium Risk and Low Risk branches and there is a provision to 
post security guards in High Risk branches. 

For the safety of vital installations like Server Rooms, DR Sites, 
two layer physical security arrangements, Early Fire Detection 
and Alarm System, Fixed Firefighting System, Clean Gas based 
Fire Suppression System in server rooms and various types of 
Fire-Extinguishers are provided.

**lkbcj lqj{kk lsVvi%**

**VIII-	HkkSfrd lqj{kk**

----

In accordance with the Standard Operating Procedures on Hiring 
of Customized Cash Vans, adequate number of Customized Cash 
Vans are hired in each Zone which are equipped with Global 
Positioning System (GPS) tracking system, fire extinguisher 
and CCTV system. The movement of Cash vans is controlled at 
Currency Chest level. 

In order to meet any kind of disaster, the Bank has a well-
established Business Continuity & Contingency Plan (Non-IT). 
Offices upto Branch level have Emergency Response Team 
to respond immediately to any kind of contingency like Fire 
incident, Earthquake, Terrorist attack, etc. Arrangements have 
been made to train Bank staff at training centers through Security 
and Fire Safety videos. Moreover, Demonstration boards for 
Security and Fire safety have been set up at major training 
centers. In addition to above, firefighting and evacuation drills 
are carried out by the Bank’s Fire Officers and Security Officers 
at all Admin offices once a year and when visiting branches/
other offices.

A team of dedicated Security Officers and Fire Officers are 
posted at Zonal Offices & Circle Offices with prime responsibility 
to carry out audit of physical security measures at branches, 
installation and maintenance of Security gadgets and to liaison 
with Police/State authorities in respect to Physical Security 
and Fire Safety. They act as advisor to respective Zonal Head/
Circle Head in all matters related to Physical Security/safety, 
movement of cash and Fire Safety.

Dedicated Fire Safety & Security Demonstration & Training 
centers are established in Staff Training Centers for staff 
awareness.

IX.	
Internal Control System 

1.	
Internal Audit

During FY 2023-24, Risk Based Internal Audit (RBIA) was 
commenced/conducted in 8174 branches/offices. During 
FY 2023-24, 1700 branches/offices were covered under 
Concurrent/Continuous audit, covering 56.61 per cent of 
the total business of the Bank as on 31st March, 2023.

Information Security (IS) Audit was conducted in 166 
offices/units. Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) 
Audit was conducted in 243 eligible branches/offices i.e. 
Authorized Dealer (AD) branches & Trade Finance Centres. 
All branches were subject to revenue audit.

2. 
Offsite Monitoring

For strengthening of Offsite Monitoring of branches/
offices, the Bank has implemented an Alert System i.e. 
Offsite Surveillance System (OSS) & also formed Data 
Analytics team i.e. Offsite Surveillance Unit (OSU).

a. 
Offsite Surveillance System (OSS): Internal audit 
functions of the Bank and Offsite Surveillance 
System (OSS), have been automated through an 

IX- 	vkarfjd fu;a=.k ç.kkyh

1-	 vkarfjd ys[kk ijh{kk

2-	 v‚QlkbV fuxjkuh

----

online application i.e. eTHIC to bring out fairness, 
objectivity, transparency and innovation in the 
Internal Audit System. 

	
Presently 68 scenarios are operational for generating 
alerts including 6 new scenarios identified by the 
Bank during FY 2023-24 based on various activities 
being undertaken by the officials at all Service 
Outlets (SOLs) in CBS in the form of transactions for 
customers as well as Office accounts.

b. 
Offsite Surveillance Unit (OSU): OSU is a dedicated 
Data Analytics Team which is conducting data 
dump analysis on regular basis and suggesting 
enhancement in system & procedure for mitigating 
the identified operational risk.

**3. 
Risk Based Internal Audit of Administrative Office**

The Bank has prescribed Risk Based Internal Audit system 
for conducting audit of its Administrative Offices.

The audit captures risk perceptions inherent in various 
areas of functioning of administrative offices including 
decision making process, communication system, efficient 
resource utilization and ways & means used to achieve 
the goals, etc. All Head Office (HO) Divisions, Domestic 
& Overseas subsidiaries are audited on annual basis. All 
other administrative offices are audited on annual basis 
except Low risk rated offices, which are subject to audit 
once in two years.

During FY 2023-24, audit of 238 administrative offices 
comprising 138 Circle Offices, 22 Zonal Offices, 22 Zonal 
Audit Offices, 9 Regional Rural Banks, 30 Head Office 
Divisions, 3 domestic subsidiaries and 14 Staff Training 
Colleges was conducted.

**4.	
Credit Audit and Review**

During FY 2023-24, Credit Audit has been undertaken for 
all eligible loan accounts both domestic and overseas. 
In terms of Credit Audit and Review Policy, during  
FY 2023-24, the coverage of audit is 55.89 per cent of the 
Bank’s total credit portfolio as on 31st March, 2023 against 
Reserve Bank of India and Bank’s policy requirement of at 
least 30-40 per cent in a year. The Bank has also digitalized 
Credit Audit process under Credit Audit Online Program 
(Credit Audit Module) which is a transparent, effective, 
accurate and time saving tool for better monitoring of 
Credit Audit.

**5. 
Know Your Customer (KYC)/Anti Money Laundering 
(AML)**

To ensure meticulous compliance of guidelines on KYC 
by all Branches/Offices while dealing with new as well as 
existing customers, the Bank has a transparent Know Your 

**3-	 ç'kklfud dk;kZy;ksa dh tksf[ke vkèkkfjr vkarfjd ys[kkijh{kk**

**4-	 _.k ys[kkijh{kk ,oa leh{kk**

**5-	 vius xzkgd dks tkfu, ¼dsokbZlh½@èku 'kksèku fuokj.k 
¼,,e,y½**

----

Customer (KYC) Policy in line with regulatory guidelines 
issued by RBI on various KYC related parameters such as 
KYC Updation, Identification of Beneficial Owners, Unique 
Customer Identification Code (UCIC), Central KYC (CKYC) 
etc. are implemented in form and content. For strict 
compliance of extant KYC guidelines, CASA Back offices 
have been established for centralized opening of Savings 
& Current accounts. Further, Document Management 
System (DMS) has been procured for digitalization of 
customer documents.

For effective monitoring of transactions of the customers, 
the Bank has implemented an Anti-Money Laundering 
(AML) system for generation of AML alerts on day to day 
basis based on the pre-defined scenarios, as advised by 
Indian Banks Association (IBA)/Financial Intelligence Unit 
– India (FIU-IND) from time to time.

To bring greater awareness amongst the Bank staff about 
KYC and Anti-Money Laundering (AML)/Combating the 
Financing of Terrorism (CFT) compliances such as Online 
basic course on KYC in ‘PNB UNIV’ - the Bank’s learning 
portal - has been made mandatory for staff members at 
branches and one session is mandatorily taken on KYC 
AML in every training program at training centres.

**Digital Initiative**

An online facility for KYC updation through Video based 
Customer Identification Process (V-CIP) application has 
been made available in Internet Banking Services (IBS) and 
PNB One Mobile Banking Services of the Bank for individual 
customers who are due for periodic KYC updation or KYC 
non-compliant. The eligible customers are redirected from 
IBS and PNB One to V-CIP.

Uploading the documents of Central KYC Registry 
(CKYCR): In terms of Prevention of Money Laundering 
Act, 2002 and RBI Master Direction on KYC, customer’s 
KYC details/documents pertaining to all new individual 
accounts opened on or after 1st January, 2017 have to be 
invariably uploaded with Central Registry of Securitisation 
Asset Reconstruction and Security Interest (CERSAI) 
within 10 days of opening the accounts. Further, vide 
amendments made on 18th December, 2020 by RBI, in 
addition to individual accounts, CKYCR has also been 
extended to Legal Entities (LEs) as well for uploading 
the KYC data pertaining to accounts of LEs opened on 
or after 1st April, 2021 on CKYCR. Moreover, RBI has also 
mandated CKYCR for accounts of individuals opened prior 
to 1st January, 2017, at the time of periodic KYC updation 
or earlier; when updated KYC information is obtained from 
customer.

Accounts opened through automated channels like 
Document Management System (DMS), BC agents, Tabs, 
Video based Customer Identification Process (V-CIP) 
and branch based e-KYC are directly pushed to CERSAI 
centrally.

**fMftVy igy**

----

Facility for opening of Current accounts and Saving 
accounts of Legal Entities and simultaneously uploading 
the data onto CKYCR has also been customized on DMS 
through which the process of CKYCR uploading of LE 
records, on an ongoing basis, has been automated on 
DMS. Current accounts of Proprietors have also been 
enabled to be opened through Tab Banking and Video-
KYC. These shall be directly pushed to CKYCR through DMS 
without any involvement at branch level, integration for 
which is under process with DMS.

Re-KYC for Individuals through Document Management 
System (DMS) has been made LIVE for all the branches 
w.e.f. 21st November, 2023 for automated CKYCR uploading 
process.

**6.	
Vigilance**

The Bank believes that an organization is as strong and 
honest as its people. The employees are the face of an 
organization and the Bank assures all its stakeholders 
including employees, customers, shareholders and 
regulator/ government bodies that the entire team of the 
Bank is committed to work with highest level of integrity 
and probity in all types of its official dealings and conducts. 

The Bank is committed towards maintaining the highest 
standards of integrity in all its operations/dealings, which 
can be reflected in its policies, procedures and practices 
that are designed to ensure that the Bank operates with 
the highest standard of integrity and transparency at all 
times.

Vigilance is applicable to every individual working in 
the organization irrespective of his/her position in the 
administrative hierarchy. The main objective of vigilance 
administration is to maintain integrity and efficiency of an 
organization and its scope includes prevention and detection 
of corruption, misconduct and malpractices, streamlining 
the system through systemic improvements and punitive 
actions. Due to efficiency achieved through preventive 
vigilance measures, effective monitoring mechanism and 
supervisory oversight over cases, the cases received by the 
Bank during the year have been taken care of.

In addition to the above, the Bank has taken various 
initiatives to improve the efficiency of Vigilance 
Administration in the FY 2023-24 like:

a.	
Vigilance Awareness Week (VAW) - 2023 was 
observed by the Bank from 30th October, 2023 to  
5th November, 2023 with the theme ‘Say no to 
corruption, commit to the Nation’ to promote 
awareness as well as commitment of Bank towards 
integrity and transparency and during the VAW-2023.

i.	
Approx. 4.65 Crore impression were made 
to the public by way of various programmes 
like 
workshops/walkathons/seminars/public 
gatherings/ nukkad nataks/preventive vigilance 
functions/CSR Activities etc.

**6-	 lrdZrk**

----

ii.	
Public Interest Disclosure & Protection of 
Informer (PIDPI) awareness campaigns were 
made through display of banners in all branches. 
4,528 Gram Sabhas and various other financial 
literacy programs were organized.

iii.	
Training on Thematic Areas of Vigilance 
Awareness Week was conducted under ‘Train 
the Trainer’ Capsule for the bank officials. 
Approx. 21,000 officials were benefitted 
through these training programmes.  

b.	
During the last year in line with the Central Vigilance 
Commission (CVC)’s advice of focusing on leveraging 
of IT systems: 

i.	
The Bank has adopted the vision of Hon’ble 
Prime Minister and has digitalized the process 
of obtaining vigilance clearances on various 
occasions like on Retirement, Voluntary 
Retirement Scheme (VRS), Foreign visit, 
Promotion, Sabbatical leaves etc.

ii.	
The Bank has revamped the process of 
submission of Assets and Liabilities by the 
officials, which will ease the process by 
reducing the time taken in feeding the details 
by the officers and will also provide hassle-free 
and transparent data for processing of assets 
and liabilities by the competent authorities, 
hence avoiding back and forth queries.

	
In addition, various training sessions/seminars 
have been organized pan-India, wherein the Chief 
Vigilance Officer, as well as senior officials from 
Vigilance Department have interacted on Vigilance 
matters. Preventive Vigilance Sessions are made 
part of induction of Management Trainees and 
Mid-Career training programmes. Total 475 training 
sessions have been conducted on preventive/
punitive vigilance in the last one year.

	
The Vigilance Department of the Bank has been 
publishing an e-magazine, ‘PNB Vigil’, and conducts 
online quiz on preventive vigilance for staff for 
deeper awareness of issues of importance. This leads 
to efficiency in operations and thereby adding value 
to the customer satisfaction and better compliance 
culture in the organization.

**X. 
Right to Information (RTI) Act**

The Bank believes that transparency is the key towards building 
sustainable trust with the existing and potential customers 
of the bank. The bank is committed towards this objective by 
implementing the provisions of RTI Act in letter and in spirit.   

**X- 	 lwpuk dk vfèkdkj vfèkfu;e**

----

The results of the Bank’s proactive approach and suo-moto 
disclosures can be seen by the overall reduction of RTI related 
matters during the FY 2023-24. During the period of 1st April 
2023 to 31st March 2024, the Bank received 5,446 RTI related 
application, a decrease of 19 per cent from previous years 6,797 
RTI related matters. 

In addition, bank conducted training sessions and workshops 
on Pan India basis of its 161 Central Public Information Officers 
(CPIOs) to interact on effective and timely disposal of RTI 
matters.

**XI.	
Discussion on Financial performance with respect to 
operational performance**

As at the end of 31st March, 2024, Bank’s Gross Global Business 
stood at Rs. 23,53,038 Crore with Gross Global Advances at  
Rs. 9,83,325 Crore and Global Deposit at Rs. 13,69,713 Crore. 
Current and Saving Deposits (CASA) was at Rs. 5,52,499 Crore 
with domestic CASA share at 41.44 per cent. In addition, Bank’s 
Operating Profit was at Rs. 24,931 Crore with the Net Profit of 
Rs. 8,245 Crore for the FY 2023-24.

**XII.	 EASE Performance**

EASE is an initiative by Department of Financial Services (DFS), 
Ministry of Finance (MOF), Government of India (GOI) as part 
of the PSB Reforms Agenda and is continuing under its 7th 

iteration. Over the years, it has become deeply ingrained in all 
PSBs strategic decisions.

Journey from EASE 1.0 to its current version, has witnessed a 
transformative shift, emphasizing digital customer experience, 
analytics-driven business improvement, tech and data-enabled 
capability building and HR operations enhancement.

The Bank has embraced the EASE framework wholeheartedly 
and continuously achieving significant milestones, reflecting 
our dedication for driving meaningful reforms and enhancing 
customer convenience in the banking sector. 

During EASE 5.0, the Bank has done well in areas related to 
building analytics capabilities, comprehensive digital collection 
management system, fraud resilience, cyber security, adopting 
modern technology capabilities, customer centric digital 
offerings and employee development. The Bank had secured 
overall 3rd position amongst all PSBs under EASE performance 
index with 2nd position under two themes i.e., “Digitally - 
enabled customer offerings”, and ‘Big data and analytics’.

During EASE 6.0, the Bank has introduced various Digital 
Journeys across Retail, Agriculture and MSME (RAM) sector 
along with implementing novel HR reforms. Through this 
proactive approach, the Bank has moved up by one place and 
overall secured 2nd rank amongst PSBs during December 2023 
quarter along with 1st rank under two themes i.e. ‘Digital and 
analytics-driven business improvement’ and ‘Tech and data-
enabled capability building’.

**XI- 	ifjpkyu fu"iknu ds lUnHkZ esa foÙkh; fu"iknu ij ppkZ**

**XII- bZt¼EASE½ fu"iknu**

----

Some achievements under these reforms include digital lending 
journeys for KCC, Housing loan, Vehicle loan, Business loan, 
Financial Supply Chain Management, Enhanced MSME and 
Agri functionalities in Mobile Banking and Internet Banking, 
New age features for NRIs in Mobile Banking, Analytics based 
collections approach, Customer Services through non-base 
branches, Open API technology for vendor on-boarding, Target 
setting tool for branches, Role clarity tool for employees and 
One-to-One coaching for high potential successors.

To summarize, the Bank’s journey under EASE reform agenda, 
started from 2018, has achieved needed impetus to excel 
in areas such as Human resource development, technology, 
collaboration and customer service.

**XIII.	 Material Developments in Human Resources (HR)/Industrial 
Relations front including number of people employed**

**1.	
Human Resources Management**

	
Total number of employees: Staff strength given in the 
following table are for the Bank for March 2023 and 
for March 2024 including those on deputation in the 
subsidiaries.

**Cadre wise Staff Strength**

**Cadre
31.03.2023
31.03.2024**

**Number
% of Total 
Staff
Number
% of Total 
Staff**

Officer
51309
49.28%
51488
50.31%

Clerks
28984
27.84%
28080
27.43%

Sub Staff (incl. PTS)
23827
22.88%
22781
22.26%

**Total
104120
100.00%
102349
100.00%**

	
Reservation Policy

The Bank follows the reservation policy for Scheduled 
Castes (SCs), Scheduled Tribes (STs), Other Backward 
Castes (OBCs) and Person with Disabilities (PWD) as 
prescribed by Government of India from time to time. 
Besides, as per norms, the Bank has taken various steps 
like maintaining reservation roster, separate liaison officer 
etc.

**Strength of SC/ST/OBC/PWD Employees**

                                                                                    (in numbers)

Cadre
31.03.2024

SC
ST
OBC
PWD

Officer
10319
3956
13237
1488

Clerks
5566
1596
7644
893

Sub-Staff
8725
1578
5741
497

Total
24610
7130
26622
2878

**1-	  ekuo lalkèku çcaèku**

**laoxZ okj deZpkjh la[;k**

**laoxZ**

**31.03.2023
31.03.2024**

**dqy
104120
100.00%
102349
100.00%**

**vkj{k.k uhfr**

laoxZ
31.03.2024

vuqlwfpr tkfr vuqlwfpr tutkfr
vU; fiNM+k oxZ
ihMCY;wMh

vfèkdkjh
10319
3956
13237
1488

fyfid
5566
1596
7644
893

vèkhuLFk 
deZpkjh
8725
1578
5741
497

dqy
24610
7130
26622
2878

----

**Age Profile of the Employees**

	
The average age of overall employees has come down 
over the years. The movement of cadre-wise average age 
in the last two years is as under:

	
	
	
	
                (Average age in years)

**Average Age as on
Officer
Clerical Sub Staff Over All**

March 2023
39.23
38.40
36.86
38.46

March 2024
39.28
38.67
37.45
38.70

**Industrial relations**

 
Industrial Relations in the Bank continued to be cordial 
with Officers’ Association/Workmen Unions. Various 
physical meetings at Circle/Zonal/Head Office level were 
held with representatives of majority Officers’ Association/
Workmen Unions during the year to promptly resolve the 
issues raised by union/association.

**2. 
Training Activities**

	
The Banking sector plays a crucial role in economic growth 
of the country. As a result, it is crucial not only to have the 
appropriate technology, systems and processes but also 
employ individuals with necessary skills, attitude, abilities 
and adaptability for the Bank to thrive in an ever-changing 
world. Therefore, a HR capability building framework 
is in place to help staff members in improving their 
knowledge/skills to enhance efficiency and productivity. 
Training processes are carefully planned and aligned 
with the organizational goals. Knowledge Enhancement 
of the employees is achieved through Hybrid Mode, 
i.e., traditional (in-person training) and online learning, 
through various modes of trainings such as classroom 
training, on the job trainings, on-location programs, 
workshops, mentoring, coaching, e-learning, virtual 
classes, video tutorials, conclaves, etc. In addition to 
this, experiential learning is also being emphasized upon 
through various activities.

 
The Bank undertook a number of measures for capacity 
building among employees aligned with their life cycle 
for their overall development. The life-cycle of the Bank 
employee starts with an Induction program. The purpose 
of Induction training in the Bank is to orient the new 
employees to the organization, its culture, policies and 
procedures. To promote conducive environment in the 
Bank for learning and to equip the existing manpower 
with appropriate skills and knowledge for the Bank’s 
growth and development, following measures were taken 
in the FY 2023-24:

**deZpkfj;ksa dh vk;q çksQ+kby**

**¼vkSlr vk;q o"kksZa esa½**

ekpZ 2023
39.23
38.40
36.86
38.46

ekpZ 2024
39.28
38.67
37.45
38.70

**vkS|ksfxd lacaèk**

**2-	 çf'k{k.k xfrfofèk;k¡**

----

**a. 
Tailor-made training programs to suit employee’s 
life cycle**

i.	
Programs ranging from induction to cadre 
change, role change and upskilling were 
conducted for employees of the Bank across all 
cadres and scales.

ii.	
Customized programs for First Time Circle 
Heads and First Time Branch Heads were 
conducted to facilitate their seamless switch to 
new roles.

iii.	
Cadre change programs were conducted for 
employees on elevation to next cadre.

iv.	
Intensive Credit and Forex programs were 
curated and conducted to develop a line of 
officers equipped with necessary skills to work 
in the domain of credit and forex.

v.	
‘Second Innings’ programs were conducted 
for superannuating employees to help them 
transition to post-retirement life.

**b.	
Leadership Development Program under PNB Udaan**

i.	
With a view to have a competitive edge in 
the evolving business environment, the Bank 
is seeking to evolve the 3 P’s, i.e., People, 
Product and Processes. For the development 
of first ‘P’, i.e., People, the Bank launched an 
ambitious Human Resource Transformation 
project, ‘UDAAN’, under which Leadership 
Development Programs (LDP) were conducted 
for all officers (900 plus) of Scale V and above.

ii.	
The program was conducted in 3 forums, each 
followed by one to one coaching to develop 
behavioural 
competencies 
among 
these 
executives to plug the gap areas as identified 
by the psychometric tests.

**c.	
Capacity Building beyond classroom**

i.	
The Bank, while recognizing the need for 
continuous up-gradation of knowledge of its 
employees, offers incentive to staff members 
on their acquiring specific higher/professional 
qualifications in terms of the approved 
scheme. The number of approved courses 
under the Scheme for providing incentive 
to Staff Members for acquiring Specialized 
Qualifications/qualifying Specific Courses, was 
increased. Further, for the first time, self-paced 
e-learning courses from various accredited 
agencies like Coursera, Udemy, etc., were 
introduced to enable staff to obtain specialized 
skills/courses/certifications.

**ch- 	ih,uch mM+ku ds rgr usr`Ro fodkl dk;ZØe**

**lh-	 d{kk ls ckgj {kerk fuekZ.k**

----

ii.	
The customized Learning Management System 
(LMS) version 5.0 was rolled out, which is our in-
house platform developed to offer knowledge 
snippets in the shape of courses to employees 
accessible anytime, anywhere. The system is 
capable for 15,000 Sharable Content Object 
Reference Model (SCORM)/Video content 
user concurrency and 30,000 assessment 
concurrency. The system also has the potency 
for Job family wise marks management with 
an interface available in both Hindi and English 
languages. Marks scored by employees in 
LMS are given due weightage in employees’ 
performance appraisal.

**d.	
Specialized Programs**

i.	
A specialized program on Digital Marketing was 
conducted in collaboration with the faculties 
from IIMs to equip the participants with the 
nuances and stages of Digital Marketing.

ii.	
A series of programs were conducted for 
Front Desk officials on Customer Services and 
soft skills. External faculties were engaged 
to enhance customer handling skills and 
language skills of the staff to converse with the 
customers.

**e. 
Promoting inclusivity**

i.	
Agenda of Learning & Development vertical is 
not just to cater to functional learning of staff, 
but also to motivate the workforce by different 
methods such as seminars as a part of training 
agenda. One such initiative taken last year 
was conducting Women’s Conclave for lady 
executives in the Bank in Senior Management 
where eminent women speakers were called 
to motivate the women workforce in the 
Bank. Further, trainings and webinars are also 
conducted on Gender Diversity and Prevention 
of Sexual Harassment (POSH) at workplace. 
An e-course on POSH has also been designed 
and made available for all the employees to 
sensitize them on the issue.

ii.	
The Bank is also looking at ways to make 
differently abled staff more productive by 
honing their skills under initiative of finding 
‘ability in disability’ by conducting training 
programs on ‘Follow-up for irregular loan 
accounts’.

iii.	
As per statutory requirement, pre-promotion 
training was imparted to 17,921 eligible 
employees in FY 2023-24.

**Mh- 	fof'k"V dk;ZØe**

**bZ-  lekosf'krk dks c<+kok nsuk**

----

**f.	
Knowledge Enablers**

i.	
PNB Digital Library, which is a centralized 
repository for a wide range of referral booklets 
and videos, was launched with the objective of 
providing all knowledge resources meticulously 
organized for the easy access to our field staff.

ii.	
For improving competencies of the workforce, 
job 
family 
wise 
information 
has 
been 
reorganized at one place in a new dashboard 
named ‘PNB Gyan Kosh’. The dashboard 
has been customized to segregate learning 
material/documents to enable easy access 
to relevant information specific to their job 
roles and responsibilities. Revamping the same 
as per New Job family framework is under 
process.

iii.	
New product launch booklets and videos 
prepared: The Bank has embarked on the 
journey of Digital Transformation and many 
new initiatives to promote Digitalization have 
been taken by the Bank. Learning & Knowledge 
Management Centre (LKMC) has prepared 
87 launch videos and booklets for new 
products & procedures in FY 2023-24 for easy 
understanding and quick reference of the field 
functionaries.

**WAY FORWARD**

	
Indian economy is at the cusp of sequential growth and banking 
sector is pivotal to the economic growth of India. Banks have 
strong fundamentals and are well positioned to play the part. 
The Indian economy was the fastest growing major economy 
in the world in FY 2023-24 on the back of robust consumption, 
increased government capex and strong macro fundamentals 
and it will continue to be the fastest growing economy among 
the G-20 nations in 2024. In FY 2023-24, India's economy 
expanded at 8.2 per cent in Q1, 8.1 per cent in Q2, 8.6 per 
cent in Q3 and 7.8 per cent in Q4, surpassing all estimates, and 
overall it has registered growth at 8.2 per cent in FY 2023-24 (as 
per Provisional Estimates).

The banking sector is experiencing a transformation through 
the digitization and modernization of its systems with the 
advent of new and agile technologies. By harnessing the power 
of Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML) and Cloud 
Technologies, banks can enhance their operational efficiency. 
This, in turn, enables them to streamline the digital on-boarding 
process for customers and expedite loan disbursals. Moreover, 
these advanced technologies serve as valuable decision-making 
tools, allowing banks to assess the behavioural patterns of their 
customers. Additionally, the utilization of AI and ML in credit 
appraisal not only improves the credit delivery mechanism but 
also aids in fraud prevention.

**,Q- 	Kku leFkZd**

**Hkkoh ;kstuk**

----

India is experiencing the rise of new business models due to the 
success of UPI, the implementation of the Account Aggregator 
(AA) framework and the widespread adoption of digital 
banking services. This has led to an increasing number of banks 
collaborating with innovative service providers to empower 
customers in leveraging their data and accessing a broader 
range of services.

With the evolution happening in customer behaviour, fintechs 
are acting as a catalyst for banks. These are providing banks 
with cutting-edge technologies to augment their services and 
cater to their customers’ changing needs. Banks must engage 
more with fintechs to leverage the advanced technologies 
developed by fintechs. Also, fintechs need the expertise of 
banks to understand customer behaviour and increase customer 
engagement. The two parties together can bring a revolution to 
the entire financial landscape of India.

Going ahead, there will be a renewed focus on Green and 
Sustainable Banking, directing resources towards initiatives 
that align with Environment, Social and Governance (ESG) 
goals following global benchmarks. Financial institutions are 
expanding their offerings to include eco-friendly products such 
as virtual debit and credit cards, which are not only convenient 
and user-friendly but also accessible to customers.

In the ever-evolving landscape of banking, Punjab National Bank 
stands resolute, poised to navigate the challenges of today and 
tomorrow with unwavering commitment. As the bank reflects 
on its 130-year long journey, "Doing well by doing good" remains 
more than a mantra; it is the cornerstone of the Bank’s ethos. 
The institution firmly believes that its success is intertwined 
with the prosperity of its diverse customer segments.

Building upon its rich legacy and strong presence in the Indian 
banking sector, the Bank is primed to continue its evolution 
and innovation. Looking ahead, its vision of becoming the 
pre-eminent bank in the industry and the employer of choice 
remains steadfast. Embracing technological advancements, 
the Bank is committed to enhancing customer experience 
through seamless digital journeys. Recognizing that digitization 
transcends mere technology, the Bank is reshaping the way 
it interacts with customers and communities, ensuring they 
benefit from cutting-edge digital solutions while upholding the 
highest ethical standards.

The Bank reaffirms its commitment to ethical banking practices, 
prioritizing societal and environmental well-being alongside 
financial growth. The institution recognizes that sustainable 
success hinges on robust credit underwriting and proactive 
recovery measures, which will drive improvements in asset 
quality and bolster profitability.

The Bank’s dedicated employees, through their targeted efforts, 
will continue to elevate its brand value, reinforcing Punjab 
National Bank as the trusted partner upon which customers 
can rely. Together, they embody the institution’s mission of 
delivering quality financial services by leveraging technology to 

----

create value for all stakeholders, contributing to the economic 
growth of the nation, whilst staying true to its motto – “the 
name you can bank upon”.

Guided by its core values—teamwork, innovation, objectivity, 
adaptability and integrity—the Bank is ready to embrace the 
challenges of tomorrow, leveraging its strengths and legacy 
to forge a brighter future for Punjab National Bank and the 
communities it serves.

*******

*******

----

**dkWjiksjsV vfHk’kklu ij ys[kkijh{kdksa dk çek.ki=**

**iatkc uS’kuy cSad ds lnL;x.k**

Ñrs Mh ds NktM+ ,aM da-
lunh ys[kkdkj
,Qvkj,u% 304138bZ

Ñrs ,l lh ckiuk ,aM ,lksfl,V~l
lunh ys[kkdkj
,Qvkj,u% 115649MCY;w

Ñrs mesn tSu ,aM da-
lunh ys[kkdkj
,Qvkj,u% 119250MCY;w

lh, fnus’k xksfndk 
Hkkxhnkj 
¼,e- ua- 072738½
;wMhvkbZ,u% 24072738BKEGTR4672

**Ñrs ,u ds HkkxZo ,aM da-
lunh ys[kkdkj
,Qvkj,u% 000429,u**

**Ñrs ih ,l Mh ,aM ,lksfl,V~l
lunh ys[kkdkj
,Qvkj,u% 004501lh**

lh, ,u ds HkkxZo
Hkkxhnkj 
¼,e-ua- 080624½
;wMhvkbZ,u% 24080624BKEJW18167

	
LFkku% ubZ fnYyh
fnukad% 09-05-2024

----

**AUDITORS’ CERTIFICATE ON CORPORATE GOVERNANCE**

**To The Members of Punjab National Bank**

We have examined the compliance of conditions of Corporate Governance by Punjab National Bank for the year ended on March 31, 2024, 
as stipulated in SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 (‘SEBI LODR Regulations’), as applicable during 
the relevant year. 

The compliance of conditions of Corporate Governance is the responsibility of the Management. Our examination was carried out in 
accordance with the Guidance Note on Certification of Corporate Governance, issued by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, 
and was limited to procedures and implementation thereof, adopted by the Bank for ensuring the compliance of the conditions of Corporate 
Governance. It is neither an audit nor an expression of opinion on the financial statements of the Bank.	

In our opinion and to the best of our information and according to the explanations given to us we certify that the Bank has, in all material 
aspects, complied with the conditions of Corporate Governance as stipulated in the above mentioned SEBI Regulations to the extent these 
do not contradict the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and Banking companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, except for 
the following:

The Position of one Director each under Section 9(3)(e), 9(3)(f), 9(3)(g) and 9(3)(h) of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970, were vacant on the Board of the Bank.

Restriction to Use: This certificate is addressed to and provided to the members of the Bank solely for the purpose of enabling them to 
understand the requirements of the Listing Regulations related to Corporate Governance, and it should not be used by any other person or 
for any other purpose. Accordingly, we do not accept or assume any liability or any duty of care for any other purpose or to any other person 
to whom this Certificate is shown or into whose hands it may come without our prior consent in writing. We have no responsibility to update 
this Certificate for any events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Certificate.

We state that no investor grievance is pending for a period exceeding one month against the Bank as per the records maintained by the 
Stakeholders Relationship Committee. 

We further state that such compliance is neither an assurance as to the future viability of the Bank nor the efficiency or effectiveness with 
which the Management has conducted the affairs of the Bank.

**For D K Chhajer & Co.
Chartered Accountants 
FRN: 304138E**

**For S C Bapna & Associates
Chartered Accountants 
FRN: 115649W**

**For Ummed Jain & Co.
Chartered Accountants 
FRN: 119250W**

**CA Nand Kishore Sarraf 
Partner 
(M. No. 510708) 
UDIN: 24510708BKBMPB2969**

**CA Jai Prakash Gupta 
Partner 
(M. No. 088903) 
UDIN: 24088903BKGPWN3703**

**CA Dinesh Godika 
Partner 
(M. No. 072738) 
UDIN: 24072738BKEGTR4672**

**For N K Bhargava & Co.
Chartered Accountants 
FRN: 000429N**

**For P S D & Associates
Chartered Accountants 
FRN: 004501C**

**CA N K Bhargava
Partner 
(M.No. 080624) 
UDIN: 24080624BKEJWA8167**

**CA Abhinav Sharma 
Partner 
(M.No. 411219) 
UDIN: 24411219BKFXEK1523**

	

**Place: New Delhi
Date: 09.05.2024**

----

**d‚jiksjsV vfHk'kklu ij fjiksVZ**

**1-	 d‚jiksjsV vfHk'kklu dk fl)kar**

**2-	 funs'kd eaMy**

**Ø- 
la-**

**funs'kd dk 
uke ¼lqJh@
Jh@Jherh½**

**cSad ds funs'kd eaMy dh lfefr;ksa 
dh lnL;rk@vè;{krk**

**31-03-2024  
dks 
funs'kdksa  
}kjk 
èkkfjr 
ih,uch ds 
'ks;jksa  
dh la[;k**

1.
ds- th-  
vuar—".ku

07.11.2022
,e-,e,e]
ch-,llh- 
xSj& 
dk;Zikyd 
vè;{k

2000

2.
vrqy dqekj 
xks;y

01.02.2022
lh,]
ch-d‚e] 
lh,vkÃvkÃch

cSaÇdx] ys[kk 
ijh{kk vkSj 
ys[kk

15

----

**Report on Corporate Governance**

**1.	
Corporate Governance Philosophy**

**The Bank believes in enhancing investor and other stakeholders’ confidence and setting high standards of transparency, ethical values 
for improving efficiency and growth of the organization. The Bank is committed to following best Corporate Governance practices based 
on transparency, professionalism and accountability.**

**Our corporate structure, business, operations and disclosure practices have been strictly aligned to the above Corporate Governance 
Philosophy.**

**The Bank is a body corporate constituted under the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 and is 
regulated by the Reserve Bank of India. Being a listed entity, the Bank complies with the provisions of SEBI (Listing Obligations and 
Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 to the extent it does not violate the provisions of the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, the Nationalized Banks (Management and Miscellaneous Provisions) Scheme, 1970 and the 
Guidelines, Directives, etc. issued by the Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India in this regard.**

**The Board of the Bank strives to optimize value for all stakeholders like shareholders, employees, customers and the society at large.**

**2.	
Board of Directors**

**The Board of the Bank is constituted in accordance with the provisions of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970 and the Nationalized Banks (Management & Miscellaneous Provisions) Scheme, 1970.**

**2.1	 As per the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, the directors to be nominated under clause (h) or 
to be elected under clause (i) of sub-section (3) shall have special knowledge or practical experience in respect of one or more of the 
matters, namely: agriculture and rural economy, banking, co-operation, economics, finance, law, small scale industry and the special 
knowledge of, and practical experience in matters or areas relating to (i) Information Technology (ii) Payment & Settlement Systems (iii) 
Human Resources (iv) Risk Management and (v) Business Management, which would be useful to the Bank.**

**The Composition of the Board of Directors as on 31.03.2024 with date of their appointment, category, membership of other Committees 
etc. along with the Chart/Matrix setting out the skills/expertise/competence of the Directors is given below:**

**Sr. 
No.**

**Name of 
Director  
Shri/Smt.**

**Date of 
Appoint- 
ment
Qualification
Category 
of Director
Experience
Skills/
Expertise/ 
Competence**

**Membership/ Chairmanship of 
Committees of  Board of the 
Bank**

Membership/ 
Chairmanship of ACB 
and Stakeholders’ 
Relationship  
Committee in 
Companies (other 
than PNB)

No. of 
Shares 
of PNB 
held by 
Directors 
as on 
31.03.2024

1.
K. G. Anantha- 
krishnan
07.11.2022
M. MM, B.Sc.
Non-
Executive 
Chairman

Over 41 years 
of progressive 
leadership 
experience in 
pharmaceuticals 
industry.

Finance, 
Marketing 
Management, 
Sales and Risk 
Management

1.	 Special Committee of Board 
to monitor and follow up fraud 
cases involving Rs.1.00 crore 
and above – Chairperson
2.	 Performance Evaluation 
Committee – Chairperson
3.	 Risk Management Committee 
of the Board 
4.	 IT Strategy Committee 
5.	 Nomination and 
Remuneration Committee 

1.	 Suven 
Pharmaceuticals 
Limited 
(Chairperson-
SRC and 
Member - ACB)

2000

2.
Atul Kumar 
Goel
01.02.2022
CA, B.Com, 
CAIIB
MD&CEO
Over 32 years 
of experience 
in Nationalized 
Banks

Banking, Audit 
& Accounts
1.	 Management Committee of 
the Board – Chairperson
2.	 Customer Service Committee 
– Chairperson
3.	 Directors’ Promotion 
Committee – Chairperson
4.	 Committee of Directors 
to Review Vigilance and 
Non Vigilance Cases – 
Chairperson 
5.	 Credit Approval Committee of 
the Board – Chairperson
6.	 Election of Shareholder 
Directors – Voting by Public 
Sector Banks – Chairperson
7.	 Committee of the Board 
to monitor the progress in 
Recovery – Chairperson

1.	 The Oriental 
Insurance 
Company 
Limited (ACB- 
Member)
2.	 PNB Housing 
Finance Limited 
(SRC-Member)

15

----

**Ø- 
la-**

**funs'kd dk 
uke ¼lqJh@
Jh@Jherh½**

**cSad ds funs'kd eaMy dh lfefr;ksa 
dh lnL;rk@vè;{krk**

'kwU;

4.
fcuksn dqekj
21.11.2022
ihthMhch,Q]
ch-,llh-]  
lh,vkÃvkÃch] 
,Qvkj,e

'kwU;
6350

----

**Sr. 
No.**

**Name of 
Director  
Shri/Smt.**

**Date of 
Appoint- 
ment
Qualification
Category 
of Director
Experience
Skills/
Expertise/ 
Competence**

**Membership/ Chairmanship of 
Committees of  Board of the 
Bank**

Membership/ 
Chairmanship of ACB 
and Stakeholders’ 
Relationship  
Committee in 
Companies (other 
than PNB)

No. of 
Shares 
of PNB 
held by 
Directors 
as on 
31.03.2024

8.	 Committee for Review 
of Identification of Wilful 
Defaulters and Non 
Cooperative Borrowers 
Classification – Chairperson
9.	 Steering Committee of the 
Board on HR – Chairperson
10.	Business Review Committee 
– Chairperson
11.	Capital Raising Committee – 
Chairperson
12.	Special Committee of Board 
to monitor and follow up fraud 
cases involving Rs.1.00 crore 
and above 
13.	Risk Management Committee 
of the Board 
14.	Stakeholders Relationship 
Committee 

3.
Kalyan Kumar
21.10.2021
M.Sc., CAIIB
Executive 
Director
Over 29 years 
of experience 
in Nationalized 
Banks.

Banking, 
Human 
Resources 
and Digital 
Transformation

1.	 Steering Committee of the 
Board on HR 
2.	 Management Committee of 
the Board 
3.	 Customer Service Committee 
4.	 IT Strategy Committee 
5.	 Special Committee of Board 
to monitor and follow up fraud 
cases involving Rs.1.00 crore 
and above 
6.	 Committee of Directors to 
Review Vigilance and Non 
Vigilance Cases 
7.	 Credit Approval Committee of 
the Board 
8.	 Election of Shareholder 
Directors – Voting by Public 
Sector Banks 
9.	 Committee of the Board 
to monitor the progress in 
Recovery 
10.	Business Review Committee 
11.	Capital Raising Committee 

India Infrastructure 
Finance Company 
Limited (ACB – 
Member)

Nil

4.
Binod Kumar
21.11.2022
PGDBF, 
B.Sc., CAIIB, 
FRM

Executive 
Director
Over 29 years 
of experience 
in Nationalized 
Banks

Banking, Risk 
Management
1.	 Stakeholders Relationship 
Committee 
2.	 Management Committee of 
the Board 
3.	 Customer Service Committee 
4.	 IT Strategy Committee 
5.	 Special Committee of Board 
to monitor and follow up fraud 
cases involving Rs.1.00 crore 
and above 
6.	 Committee of Directors to 
Review Vigilance and Non 
Vigilance Cases 
7.	 Credit Approval Committee of 
the Board 
8.	 Election of Shareholder 
Directors – Voting by Public 
Sector Banks 
9.	 Committee of the Board 
to monitor the progress in 
Recovery 
10.	Business Review Committee 
11.	Capital Raising Committee 

Nil
6350

----

**Ø- 
la-**

**funs'kd dk 
uke ¼lqJh@
Jh@Jherh½**

**cSad ds funs'kd eaMy dh lfefr;ksa 
dh lnL;rk@vè;{krk**

**31-03-2024  
dks 
funs'kdksa  
}kjk 
èkkfjr 
ih,uch ds 
'ks;jksa  
dh la[;k**

'kwU;
25

6.
fcHkq izlkn 
egkik=

'kwU;
6350

7.
iadt 'kekZ
11.04.2022
,ech,] ,e-, 
¼yksd ç'kklu½
ch-Vsd

Hkkjr 
ljdkj 
ds ukfer 
funs'kd

'kwU;
'kwU;

----

**Sr. 
No.**

**Name of 
Director  
Shri/Smt.**

**Date of 
Appoint- 
ment
Qualification
Category 
of Director
Experience
Skills/
Expertise/ 
Competence**

**Membership/ Chairmanship of 
Committees of  Board of the 
Bank**

Membership/ 
Chairmanship of ACB 
and Stakeholders’ 
Relationship  
Committee in 
Companies (other 
than PNB)

No. of 
Shares 
of PNB 
held by 
Directors 
as on 
31.03.2024

5.
M. 
Paramasivam
01.12.2022
B.Sc. 
(Agriculture)
Executive 
Director
Over 34 years 
of experience 
in Nationalized 
Banks

Banking, 
Agriculture
1.	 Risk Management Committee 
of the Board
2.	 Management Committee of 
the Board 
3.	 Customer Service Committee 
4.	 IT Strategy Committee 
5.	 Special Committee of Board 
to monitor and follow up fraud 
cases involving Rs.1.00 crore 
and above 
6.	 Committee of Directors to 
Review Vigilance and Non 
Vigilance Cases 
7.	 Credit Approval Committee of 
the Board 
8.	 Election of Shareholder 
Directors – Voting by Public 
Sector Banks 
9.	 Committee of the Board 
to monitor the progress in 
Recovery 
10.	Business Review Committee 
11.	Capital Raising Committee 

Nil
25

6.
Bibhu Prasad 
Mahapatra
09.10.2023
M.A., CAIIB
Executive 
Director
Over 34 years 
of experience 
in Nationalized 
Banks

Banking
1.	 Management Committee of 
the Board 
2.	 Customer Service Committee 
3.	 IT Strategy Committee 
4.	 Special Committee of Board 
to monitor and follow up fraud 
cases involving Rs.1.00 crore 
and above 
5.	 Committee of Directors to 
Review Vigilance and Non 
Vigilance Cases 
6.	 Credit Approval Committee of 
the Board 
7.	 Election of Shareholder 
Directors – Voting by Public 
Sector Banks 
8.	 Committee of the Board 
to monitor the progress in 
Recovery 
9.	 Business Review Committee 
10.	Capital Raising Committee

Nil
6350

7.
Pankaj 
Sharma
11.04.2022
MBA,  
M. A. (Public 
Administra- 
tion), B.Tech

Govt. 
of India 
Nominee 
Director

More than 
19 years of 
experience in 
Public Financial 
Management.

Economics 
and Finance
1.	 Directors’ Promotion 
Committee 
2.	 Special Committee of Board 
to monitor and follow up fraud 
cases involving Rs.1.00 crore 
and above 
3.	 Appellate Authority and 
Reviewing Authority 
4.	 Committee of Directors to 
Review Vigilance and Non 
Vigilance Cases 
5.	 Steering Committee of the 
Board on HR 
6.	 Performance Evaluation 
Committee 

Nil
Nil

----

**Ø- 
la-**

**funs'kd dk 
uke ¼lqJh@
Jh@Jherh½**

**cSad ds funs'kd eaMy dh lfefr;ksa 
dh lnL;rk@vè;{krk**

**31-03-2024  
dks 
funs'kdksa  
}kjk 
èkkfjr 
ih,uch ds 
'ks;jksa  
dh la[;k**

8.
mek 'kadj
14.07.2023
fctusl 
bdksu‚feDl 
esa ijkLukrd] 
,e-,llh-]  
ch-d‚e- 
¼v‚ulZ½

Hkkjrh; 
fjtoZ cSad 
dh ukfer  
funs'kd

'kwU;
'kwU;

9.
iadt tks'kh
21.12.2021
lh,] ch-d‚e
va'kdkfyd 
xSj& 
ljdkjh 
funs'kd

ys[kkijh{kk vkSj 
ys[kk esa 17 o"kks± 
ls vfèkd dk 
is'ksoj vuqHko

'kwU;
'kwU;

10. latho dqekj 
fla?ky

va'kdkfyd 
xSj& 
ljdkjh 
funs'kd

'kwU;
1000

250

----

**Sr. 
No.**

**Name of 
Director  
Shri/Smt.**

**Date of 
Appoint- 
ment
Qualification
Category 
of Director
Experience
Skills/
Expertise/ 
Competence**

**Membership/ Chairmanship of 
Committees of  Board of the 
Bank**

Membership/ 
Chairmanship of ACB 
and Stakeholders’ 
Relationship  
Committee in 
Companies (other 
than PNB)

No. of 
Shares 
of PNB 
held by 
Directors 
as on 
31.03.2024

8.
Uma Sankar
14.07.2023
Master in 
Business 
Economics, 
M.Sc., 
B.com. 
(Hons.)

RBI 
Nominee 
Director

More than 
30 years of 
experience 
as a Central 
Banker covering 
supervision of 
Banks, currency 
management, 
financial 
inclusion, 
training, 
complaints 
redressal, etc.

Central Banker
1.	 Audit Committee of the Board 
2.	 Management Committee of 
the Board 
3.	 Directors’ Promotion 
Committee 
4.	 Committee of Directors to 
Review Vigilance and Non 
Vigilance Cases 

Nil
Nil

9.
Pankaj Joshi
21.12.2021
CA, B.Com
Part-Time 
Non-Official 
Director

Over 17 years 
of professional 
experience 
in audit and 
accounts

Audit and 
Accounts
1.	 Performance Evaluation 
Committee 
2.	 Audit Committee of the Board 
3.	 Customer Service Committee 
4.	 Business Review Committee 
5.	 Capital Raising Committee 
6.	 Stakeholders Relationship 
Committee 
7.	 Committee for Review 
of Identification of Wilful 
Defaulters and Non 
Cooperative Borrowers 
Classification 

Nil
Nil

10.
Sanjeev 
Kumar Singhal
21.12.2021
CMA, 
CA, LLB, 
PGDFM, 
DISA, 
Diploma in 
IRM and 
Forensic 
Audit, B.Com

Part-Time 
Non-Official 
Director

Over 28 years 
of professional 
experience 
in audit and 
accounts & 
Over 17 years 
of experience 
in review of 
security and 
internal controls 
in Information 
systems, 
ERPs & IT 
Applications

Audit and 
Accounts, 
IT & Risk 
Management, 
Financial 
Management, 
Law

1.	 Audit Committee of the Board 
- Chairperson
2.	 Risk Management Committee 
of the Board 
3.	 IT Strategy Committee 
4.	 Special Committee of Board 
to monitor and follow up fraud 
cases involving Rs.1.00 crore 
and above
5.	 Committee of the Board 
to monitor the progress in 
recovery 
6.	 Committee for Review 
of Identification of Wilful 
Defaulters and Non 
Cooperative Borrowers 
Classification 
7.	 Nomination & Remuneration 
Committee 
8.	 Appellate Authority and 
Reviewing Authority
9.	 Capital Raising Committee 

Nil
1000

11.
Dr. Rekha Jain
12.09.2021
Ph.D, M.Phil, 
M.Sc., B.Sc. 
(Hons.)

Shareholder 
Director
Over 39 years 
of diverse 
experience in 
Information 
Technology, 
Payment & 
Settlement 
systems, 
Business 
Management 
and Risk 
Management.  

Retired as 
Professor from 
IIM, Ahmedabad

Information 
Technology, 
Risk 
Management, 
Business 
Management, 
Payment & 
settlement 
systems

1.	 Risk Management Committee 
of the Board - Chairperson
2.	 IT Strategy Committee – 
Chairperson
3.	 Stakeholders Relationship 
Committee – Chairperson 
4.	 Nomination & Remuneration 
Committee
5.	 Management Committee of 
the Board 
6.	 Customer Service Committee 
7.	 Steering Committee of the 
Board on HR 
8.	 Appellate Authority and 
Reviewing Authority 
9.	 Committee of the Board 
to monitor the progress in 
Recovery

Gujarat Gas Limited 
(Member of ACB 
and SRC)

250

----

Ø- 
la-

funs'kd dk 
uke ¼lqJh@
Jh@Jherh½

cSad ds funs'kd eaMy dh lfefr;ksa 
dh lnL;rk@vè;{krk

31-03-2024  
dks 
funs'kdksa  
}kjk 
èkkfjr 
ih,uch ds 
'ks;jksa  
dh la[;k

12. tfranj flag 
ctkt

foi.ku] 
lwpuk 
çkS|ksfxdh] 
ekuo 
lalkèku] 
dkÆed 
ç'kkluA

'kwU;
100

**Ø-la-
funs'kd dk uke ¼Jh½
funs'kd dh Js.kh
lekiu frfFk
dkj.k**

1.
vfuy dqekj feJk
vkjchvkÃ ukfer funs'kd
14.07.2023
vofèk lekIr

2.
fot; nqcs
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
31.08.2023
vofèk lekIr

3.
xkSre xqgk
'ks;jèkkjd funs'kd
05.10.2023
vofèk lekIr

**2-3	 vU; lwphc) laLFkkvksa ds cksMZ@lfefr;ksa esa funs'kdksa dh lnL;rk@vè;{krk dk fooj.k%**

Lora= funs'kd

2.
vrqy dqekj xks;y
ih,uch gkmÇlx Qkbusal fyfeVsM
cksMZ
,uvkjlh
lh,lvkj

vè;{k 
lnL; 
lnL; 

xSj&dk;Zikyd

3.
dY;k.k dqekj
ih,uch fxYV~l fyfeVsM 
ifjpkyu ekeyksa ds 
fy, funs'kd eaMy 
dh lfefr

vè;{k
vè;{k
xSj&dk;Zikyd

lnL;
Lora= funs'kd

12.
tfranj flag ctkt
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;

----

Sr. 
No.

Name of 
Director  
Shri/Smt.

Date of 
Appoint- 
ment
Qualification
Category 
of Director
Experience
Skills/
Expertise/ 
Competence

Membership/ Chairmanship of 
Committees of  Board of the 
Bank

Membership/ 
Chairmanship of ACB 
and Stakeholders’ 
Relationship  
Committee in 
Companies (other 
than PNB)

No. of 
Shares 
of PNB 
held by 
Directors 
as on 
31.03.2024

12.
Jatinder Singh 
Bajaj
06.10.2023
M.A. 
(Economics)
Shareholder 
Director
More than 
25 years of 
experience in 
Marketing

Marketing, 
Information 
Technology, 
Human 
Resources, 
Personnel 
Administration.

1.	 Appellate Authority and 
Reviewing Authority - 
Chairperson
2.	 Nomination & Remuneration 
Committee – Chairperson
3.	 Risk Management Committee 
of the Board
4.	 Audit Committee of the Board
5.	 Special Committee of Board 
to monitor and follow up fraud 
cases involving Rs.1.00 crore 
and above
6.	 Committee for Review 
of Identification of Wilful 
Defaulters and Non 
Cooperative Borrowers 
Classification
7.	 Performance Evaluation 
Committee
8.	 Business Review Committee

Nil
100

Note: The name of the Committees in which the Director is a member has been mentioned and the Chairmanship has been specifically indicated wherever applicable.

**2.2	 The following members ceased to be the Directors during the year:**

**Sr. No.
Name of Director (Shri)
Category of Director
Date of Cessation
Reason**

1.
Anil Kumar Misra
RBI Nominee Director
14.07.2023
Completion of Tenure

2.
Vijay Dube
Executive Director
31.08.2023
Completion of Tenure

3.
Gautam Guha
Shareholder Director
05.10.2023
Completion of Tenure
 

**2.3	 Details of Membership/Chairmanship of Directors in the Board/Committees of other listed entities:**

**Sr. No.
Name of Director  
(Shri/Smt.)
Name of other Listed Entity in which 
the Director is a member of the Board
Name of the Board/Committee in other 
listed entity where the Director is 
Chairperson/ Member**

Category of 
Directorship in 
other listed entities
1.
K. G. Ananthakrishnan
Suven Pharmaceuticals Limited
Board
SRC
ACB
NRC
CSR

Member
Chairperson
Member
Member
Member

Independent 
Director

2.
Atul Kumar Goel
PNB Housing Finance Limited
Board
NRC
SRC

Chairperson
Member
Member

Non-Executive

3.
Kalyan Kumar
PNB Gilts Ltd.
Board
Committee of 
Directors for 
Operational Matters

Chairperson
Chairperson
Non-Executive

4.
Binod Kumar
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
5.
M. Paramasivam
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
6.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
7.
Pankaj Sharma
Nil
Nil
Nil 
Nil
8.
Uma Sankar
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
9.
Pankaj Joshi
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
10.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
11.
Dr. Rekha  Jain
Gujarat Gas Limited
Board
ACB
SRC
RMC
NRC

Member
Independent 
Director

12.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil

----

**2.4	 Details of Board Meetings held during the year:**

**Sr. 
No.
Date of the 
Meeting
Total Number of 
Directors on the 
Board**

**Number of 
Directors present 
in the Meeting**

1.
15.04.2023
12
12

2.
26.04.2023
12
11

3.
19.05.2023
12
12

4.
30.05.2023
12
12

5.
28.06.2023
12
11

6.
25.07.2023
12
12

7.
26.07.2023
12
12

8.
29.08.2023
12
12

9.
27.09.2023
11
10

10.
03.10.2023
11
11

11.
25.10.2023
12
11

12.
26.10.2023
12
12

13.
29.11.2023
12
11

14.
28.12.2023
12
12

15.
25.01.2024
12
12

16.
29.01.2024
12
9

17.
27.02.2024
12
10

18.
28.03.2024
12
10

**2.5	 The details of number of Board Meetings & the last Annual 
General Meeting (AGM) attended by Directors during the 
Financial Year are as under:**

Sr. 
No.
Name of Directors (Shri/
Smt.)
Board 
Meetings 
held during 
their tenure

Board 
Meetings 
attended

Attendance 
in last AGM

1.
K. G. Ananthakrishnan
18
18
Yes

2.
Atul Kumar Goel
18
18
Yes

3.
Vijay Dube
08
07
Yes

4.
Kalyan Kumar
18
17
Yes

5.
Binod Kumar
18
18
Yes

6.
M. Paramasivam
18
17
Yes

7.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
08
06
N.A.

8.
Pankaj Sharma
18
16
No

9.
Anil Kumar Misra
05
05
No

10.
Uma Sankar
13
13
N.A.

11.
Pankaj Joshi
18
17
No

12.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
18
16
No

13.
Gautam Guha
10
10
Yes

14.
Dr. Rekha Jain
18
18
Yes

15.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
08
06
N.A.

Note: N.A. indicates Not a Director during the relevant period.

**2-4	o"kZ ds nkSjku vk;ksftr cksMZ dh cSBdksa dk fooj.k%**

**Ø- 
la-
cSBd dh  
frfFk
funs'kd eaMy esa 
funs'kdksa dh dqy 
la[;k**

**cSBd esa mifLFkr 
funs'kdksa dh 
la[;k**

1.
15.04.2023
12
12

2.
26.04.2023
12
11

3.
19.05.2023
12
12

4.
30.05.2023
12
12

5.
28.06.2023
12
11

6.
25.07.2023
12
12

7.
26.07.2023
12
12

8.
29.08.2023
12
12

9.
27.09.2023
11
10

10.
03.10.2023
11
11

11.
25.10.2023
12
11

12.
26.10.2023
12
12

13.
29.11.2023
12
11

14.
28.12.2023
12
12

15.
25.01.2024
12
12

16.
29.01.2024
12
9

17.
27.02.2024
12
10

18.
28.03.2024
12
10

**cksMZ dh 
cSBdksa esa 
mifLFkfr**

**fiNyh 
okÆ"kd vke 
cSBd esa 
mifLFkfr**

1.
ds- th- vuar—".ku
18
18
gk¡

2.
vrqy dqekj xks;y
18
18
gk¡

3.
fot; nqcs
08
07
gk¡

4.
dY;k.k dqekj
18
17
gk¡

5.
fcuksn dqekj
18
18
gk¡

6.
,e- ijef'koe
18
17
gk¡

7.
fcHkq izlkn egkik=
08
06
gk¡ 

8.
iadt 'kekZ
18
16
ykxw ugha

9.
vfuy dqekj feJk
05
05
ugha

10.
mek 'kadj
13
13
ugha

11.
iadt tks'kh
18
17
ugha

12.
latho dqekj fla?ky
18
16
ugha

----

**2.6 Brief Profile of Directors appointed/nominated during the**

**Financial Year is given below:**

**i.	
Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, Executive Director:**

	
Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra assumed charge as the 
Executive Director on the Board of Punjab National Bank on 
October 09, 2023.

	
Shri Mahapatra started his banking journey in Punjab National 
Bank as Management Trainee in the year 1989 and has served 
the Bank for the last 34 years in various capacities across the 
country. A banking veteran, he brings to the table a wealth of 
knowledge across multiple domains of Branch Banking, Credit 
and MSME, Business Process, Forex and Trade Finance, 
Compliance, among others.

	
Previously, Shri Mahapatra was heading the Mumbai Zone of 
Punjab National Bank as Chief General Manager.

	
A post graduate in Political Science from Utkal University, he is 
also a Certified Associate Member of Indian Institute of Bankers 
(CAIIB). He also holds a diploma in Strategic Development 
Programme for Senior Management of PSB Leadership from 
IIM Bangalore.

**ii.	
Smt. Uma Sankar, RBI Nominee Director:**

	
Smt. Uma Sankar has been appointed as RBI Nominee Director 
on the Board of Punjab National Bank w.e.f. 14.07.2023. 

	
Smt. Sankar joined the Reserve Bank of India as a Direct 
Recruit Officer in Grade B in June 1993. She has served in 
Offices of RBI at Ahmedabad, Pune, Mumbai, Trivandrum and 
Chennai and has wide experience in various fields of central 
banking such as, supervision of Banks/ Non-Banking Financial 
Companies/ Urban Co-operative Banks, training of personnel, 
resolution of banking related complaints of the common man 
as Banking Ombudsman, enhancing financial literacy among 
the public, etc.

	
Prior to joining the Reserve Bank of India, she worked in 
the Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) as an Assistant 
Administrative Officer.

	
Smt. Sankar holds Master in Business Economics and 
Bachelor’s Degree in Commerce (Honors) from Delhi 
University. She has also been awarded with M.Sc. in 
Management, Organisations and Governance from London 
School of Economics and Political Science, London, UK.

	
She holds various publications in her name, viz., Handbook 
on Know Your Customer and Anti Money Laundering Norms 
for the banks, National level Study Report on the Financial 
Performance and Impediments in Growth of the Urban 
Cooperative Banks (equivalent to the credit unions in USA) 
exclusively managed by women, Handbook for the Directors 
of the Urban Cooperative Banks and Summary Report on the 
Best Practices of Cooperative banks in Europe.

**ii-	 Jherh mek 'kadj] vkjchvkÃ ukfer funs'kd%**

----

	
She was part of the working group on Non-Banking Financial 
Institutions set up by Kerala State Planning Board, Kerala, 
2015-16, and contributed to its report which was published in 
February 2016. 

	
She was awarded the prestigious Golden Jubilee Scholarship 
2008 by the RBI.

	
She is presently serving as Regional Director for Tamil Nadu 
and Puducherry, Reserve Bank of India.

iii.	 Shri Jatinder Singh Bajaj, Shareholder Director:

	
Shri Jatinder Singh Bajaj has been elected as Shareholder 
Director on the Board of the Bank w.e.f. 06.10.2023.

	
Shri Bajaj is currently posted as Zonal Manager In Charge 
(in the cadre of Executive Director), Northern Zone of Life 
Insurance Corporation of India, comprising of Delhi, Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Leh, Punjab, Rajasthan 
and Chandigarh.

	
Shri Bajaj joined LIC in 1989 as a Direct Recruit Officer. He 
holds a Post Graduate Degree in the field of Economics from 
Punjab University, Chandigarh. With a strong leadership 
quality, marketing acumen and technical expertise, he 
connects easily with all team members.

	
He has diverse and rich experience in the field of Marketing, 
Information Technology, Human Resources, Personnel 
Administration etc. and has worked in various capacities on 
important assignments.

	
During his tenure with LIC, he has contributed extensively in 
the area of Marketing for more than 25 years. 

3.	
Committees of the Board

The Board of Directors of the Bank has constituted various 
Committees of Directors and / or Executives to look into different 
areas of strategic importance in terms of Reserve Bank of India/ 
Government of India/SEBI Guidelines.

3.1 	Audit Committee of the Board (ACB)

Brief description and terms of reference:

The Audit Committee of the Board has been constituted in terms of 
RBI Guidelines contained in its Letters No. 5/16/13.100/94 dated 
09.04.1994, No. BC/ADMN/919/16.13.100/95 dated 26.09.1995, 
No. DOS.No. BC/3/08.91.020/97 dated 20.01.1997 & No. RBI/2021-
22/24 DOR.GOV.REC.8/29.67.001/2021-22 dated 26.04.2021, 
other extant guidelines of RBI and as required under Regulation 
18 of SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015. The main functions of the 
Committee are as under: -

iii-	 Jh tÇrnj Çlg ctkt & 'ks;j/kkjd funs'kd

3-	 cksMZ dh lfefr;k¡

3-1	cksMZ dh ys[kk ijh{kk lfefr ¼,lhch½

laf{kIr fooj.k vkSj fopkjkFkZ fo"k;%

----

•	
Providing direction and overseeing the audit function of 
the Bank including the organization, operationalization, 
quality control of internal audit and inspection including its 
review and follow up on the statutory/external audit of the 
Bank and inspections of RBI.

•	
To interact with Statutory Central Auditors in respect of 
quarterly/ annual Financial Statements & Reports and 
also follow up on all the issues raised in the Long Form 
Audit Report.

•	
To review the internal inspection/ Audit function of the 
Bank – the system, its quality and effectiveness in terms 
of follow up.

•	
Overseeing the Bank’s financial reporting process and the 
disclosure of its financial information to ensure that the 
financial statements are correct, sufficient and credible.

•	
To review with the Management, the Annual Financial 
Statements 
and Auditors’ 
Report 
thereon 
before 
submission to the Board for approval and also the 
changes in the Accounting Policies.

•	
To review Related Party Transactions.

•	
To carry out the functions as stipulated in the SEBI 
(LODR) Regulations, 2015 to the extent applicable to 
Public Sector Banks.

The Company Secretary of the Bank acts as the Secretary to 
the Committee in terms of Regulation 18(1)(e) of SEBI (LODR) 
Regulations, 2015.

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

Sr.No.
Name of the Director (Shri/Smt.)

1.
Sanjeev Kumar 
Singhal
Part Time Non-Official Director, 
Chairperson

2.
Uma Sankar
RBI Nominee Director, Member

3.
Pankaj Joshi    
Part Time Non-Official Director, Member

4.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
Shareholder Director, Member

Invitees(S/Shri):
Kalyan Kumar
Binod Kumar 
M. Paramasivam
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
Pankaj Sharma

Executive Director
Executive Director
Executive Director
Executive Director
GoI Nominee Director

Shri Pankaj Sharma, GoI Nominee Director, ceased to be a 
member of the Committee w.e.f. 19.07.2023 and was designated 
as Permanent Invitee for the Committee. Smt. Uma Sankar, RBI 
Nominee Director, was made member of the Committee w.e.f. 
19.07.2023 in place of Shri Anil Kumar Misra, RBI Nominee 
Director, whose tenure completed on 14.07.2023. Dr. Rekha Jain, 
Shareholder Director, was made member of the Committee w.e.f. 
19.07.2023. 

Shri Jatinder Singh Bajaj, Shareholder Director, was made member 
of the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023 in place of Shri Gautam Guha, 
Shareholder Director, whose tenure completed on 05.10.2023. 
Shri Sanjeev Kumar Singhal, part-time non official Director, was 
designated as the Chairperson of the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023.

 
•	
lacafèkr i{k ds ysunsu dh leh{kkA

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

**dk;Zikyd funs'kd
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Hkkjr ljdkj }kjk ukfer funs'kd**

----

**Shri Pankaj Joshi, Part-Time Non Official Director, was made 
member of the Committee w.e.f. 01.01.2024 in place of Dr. Rekha 
Jain, Shareholder Director.**

**Details of meetings held during the Financial Year:**

Sr. 
No.
Date of 
Meeting
Total No. of Directors 
of the Committee
No of Directors Present 
in the Meeting

1.
27.04.2023
4
3

2.
19.05.2023
4
4

3.
29.05.2023
4
4

4.
16.06.2023
4
3

5.
14.07.2023
4
3

6.
26.07.2023
4
4

7.
19.08.2023
4
4

8.
12.09.2023
4
4

9.
17.10.2023
4
4

10.
26.10.2023
4
4

11.
16.11.2023
4
3

12.
15.12.2023
4
3

13.
16.01.2024
4
4

14.
25.01.2024
4
4

15.
16.02.2024
4
3

16.
19.03.2024
4
4

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**Sr. 
No.
Name of Director 
(Shri/Smt.)
Meetings held 
during their 
tenure**

**Meetings 
attended**

**1.
Gautam Guha
8
8**

**2.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
16
16**

**3.
Pankaj Sharma
5
3**

**4.
Anil Kumar Misra
4
4**

**5.
Uma Sankar
11
11**

**6.
Pankaj Joshi
4
4**

**7.
Rekha Jain
7
7**

**8.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
8
5**

**3.2	 Risk Management Committee**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

**Risk Management Committee of the Board (RMCB) has been 
constituted as per RBI letter DBOD No. BP-520/21.04.103/2002-
03 dated 12.10.2002 on risk management, RBI Notification No. 
RBI/2021-22/24 
DOR.GOV.REC.8/29.67.001/2021-22 
dated 
26.04.2021 and Regulation 21 of SEBI (LODR) Regulations 2015. 
The Committee has the overall responsibility of managing entire 
risk of the Bank, devising suitable risk management policy including 
credit, market and operational risks, risk integration, implementation 
of best risk management practices, setting up various risk limits and 
review of the cyber security of the Bank.**

**foÙkh; o"kZ ds nkSjku vk;ksftr cSBdksa dk fooj.k%**

Ø- 
la-
cSBd dh frfFk
lfefr ds funs'kdksa 
dh dqy la[;k
cSBd esa mifLFkr 
funs'kdksa dh la[;k
1.
27.04.2023
4
3
2.
19.05.2023
4
4
3.
29.05.2023
4
4
4.
16.06.2023
4
3
5.
14.07.2023
4
3
6.
26.07.2023
4
4
7.
19.08.2023
4
4
8.
12.09.2023
4
4
9.
17.10.2023
4
4
10.
26.10.2023
4
4
11.
16.11.2023
4
3
12.
15.12.2023
4
3
13.
16.01.2024
4
4
14.
25.01.2024
4
4
15.
16.02.2024
4
3
16.
19.03.2024
4
4

**cSBdksa esa 
mifLFkfr**

**1.
xkSre xqgk
8
8**

**2.
latho dqekj Çl?ky
16
16**

**3.
iadt 'kekZ
5
3**

**4.
vfuy dqekj feJk
4
4**

**5.
mek 'kadj
11
11**

**6.
iadt tks'kh
4
4**

**7.
js[kk tSu
7
7**

**8.
tÇrnj Çlg ctkt
8
5**

**3-2 tksf[ke çcaèku lfefr**

**laf{kIr fooj.k vkSj fopkjkFkZ fo"k;%**

----

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

SNo.
Name of the Director (Shri/Smt.)

1.
Dr. Rekha Jain 
Shareholder Director, Chairperson

2.
K. G. Ananthakrishnan
Non-Executive Chairman, Member

3.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Member

4.
M. Paramasivam
Executive Director, Member 

5.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
Part Time Non-Official Director, 
Member

6.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
Shareholder Director, Member

Invitees(S/Shri):
Kalyan Kumar
Binod Kumar 
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra

Executive Director
Executive Director
Executive Director

Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director, ceased to be a member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 01.09.2023 on account of his superannuation.

Dr. Rekha Jain, Shareholder Director, was designated as the 
Chairperson of the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023 in place of Shri 
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal, Part-Time Non Official Director, who 
continued as a member of the Committee. Shri M. Paramasivam, 
Executive Director, was made member of the Committee w.e.f. 
06.10.2023. Shri Jatinder Singh Bajaj, Shareholder Director, was 
made member of the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023 in place of Shri 
Gautam Guha, Shareholder Director, whose tenure completed on 
05.10.2023.

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

Sr. 
No.
Date of 
Meeting
Total No. of Directors 
of the Committee
No of Directors 
Present in the Meeting
1.
17.06.2023
6
6
2.
28.08.2023
6
6
3.
26.09.2023
5
5
4.
17.11.2023
6
5
5.
15.01.2024
6
6
6.
15.02.2024
6
5
7.
20.03.2024
6
6

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

Sr. 
No.
Name of Director  
(Shri/Smt.)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended

1.
Dr. Rekha Jain 
7
7

2.
K. G. Ananthakrishnan
7
7

3.
Atul Kumar Goel
7
7

4.
Vijay Dube
2
2

5.
Kalyan Kumar
(as alternate arrangement)
1
1

6.
M. Paramasivam
2
2

7.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
(as alternate arrangement)
1
1

8.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
7
7

9.
Gautam Guha
3
3

10.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
4
2

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

**dk;Zikyd funs'kd
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
dk;Zikyd funs'kd**

**foÙkh; o"kZ ds nkSjku vk;ksftr cSBdksa dk fooj.k%**

**cSBdksa esa 
mifLFkfr**

1
1

1
1

8.
latho dqekj Çl?ky
7
7
9.
xkSre xqgk
3
3
10. tÇrnj Çlg ctkt
4
2

----

**3.3	 Stakeholders’ Relationship Committee**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

The Committee has been constituted in terms of Regulation 20 
of SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015 and Punjab National Bank 
(Shares & Meetings) Regulations, 2000. The Role of the Committee 
includes:

	

Monitoring the grievances of the shareholders and other 
security holders of the Bank including requests/complaints 
related to transfer/transmission of shares, non-receipt of 
annual report, non-receipt of declared dividends, issue of new/
duplicate certificates, general meetings etc. 

	

Reviewing the measures taken for effective exercise of voting 
rights by shareholders. 

	

Reviewing the adherence to the service standards adopted by 
the Bank in respect of various services being rendered by the 
Registrar & Share Transfer Agent. 

	

Review the various measures and initiatives taken by the Bank 
for reducing the quantum of unclaimed dividend and ensuring 
timely receipt of dividend warrants/ annual reports/ statutory 
notices by the shareholders of the Bank.  

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

**Sr. No.
Name of the Director (Shri/Smt.)**

1.
Dr. Rekha Jain
Shareholder Director, Chairperson

2.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Member

3.
Binod Kumar
Executive Director, Member

4.
Pankaj Joshi
Part Time Non-Official Director, 
Member

The frequency of the meeting is annual or as and when required.

**Details of meeting held during the financial year:**

Sr. 
No.
Date of 
Meeting
Total No. of Directors 
of the Committee
No of Directors 
Present in the Meeting

1.
19.08.2023
4
4

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**Sr. 
No.
Name of Director 
(Shri/Smt.)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended**

1.
Dr. Rekha Jain
1
1

2.
Atul Kumar Goel
1
1

3.
Binod Kumar
1
1

4.
Pankaj Joshi
1
1

**Status of Shareholders’ Complaints received during the year:**

Total no. of complaints received during FY 2023-24
–
32

No. of complaints not resolved to the satisfaction of 
shareholders 
–
Nil

No. of complaints pending as on 31.03.2024
–
Nil

**3-3	 fgrèkkjd lacaèk lfefr**

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

**foÙkh; o"kZ ds nkSjku vk;ksftr cSBdksa ds fooj.k%**

1.
19.08.2023
4
4

**cSBdksa esa 
mifLFkfr**

1.
M‚- js[kk tSu
1
1

2.
vrqy dqekj xks;y
1
1

3.
fcuksn dqekj
1
1

4.
iadt tks'kh
1
1

–
'kwU;

fnukad 31-03-2024 dks yfEcr f'kdk;rksa dh la[;k
–
'kwU;

----

Ms. Ekta Pasricha, Company Secretary, is the Compliance Officer 
of the Bank in terms of Regulation 6 of SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 
2015.

**3.4	 Nomination & Remuneration Committee**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

The Committee has been constituted as per RBI Master Directions 
dated 02.08.2019, RBI Notification No. RBI/2021-22/24 DOR.GOV.
REC.8/29.67.001/2021-22 dated 26.04.2021 and as required under 
Regulation 19 of SEBI (LODR) Regulation 2015. The Committee 
is constituted for undertaking due diligence to determine the “Fit 
and Proper” criteria of the persons to be elected as Directors under 
clause (i) of sub section 3 of Section 9 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970. Further, Govt. 
of India vide its Notification dated 30.08.2019 directed to constitute 
a single Nomination and Remuneration Committee for carrying out 
the functions of both Nomination and Remuneration Committee 
with the composition as specified by RBI vide its Master Directions 
dated 02.08.2019, as amended. 

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

Sr. No.
Name of the Director (Shri/Smt.)

1.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
Shareholder Director, Chairperson

2.
K. G. Ananthakrishnan
Non-Executive Chairman, Member

3.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
Part Time Non-Official Director, 
Member

4.
Dr. Rekha Jain
Shareholder Director, Member

Shri Jatinder Singh Bajaj, Shareholder Director, was made member 
of the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023 in place of Shri Gautam Guha, 
Shareholder Director, whose tenure completed on 05.10.2023. 
Further, Shri Jatinder Singh Bajaj, Shareholder Director, was 
designated as the Chairperson of the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023 
in place of Dr. Rekha Jain, Shareholder Director, who continued as 
a member of the Committee. 

**Details of meeting held during the financial year:**

Sr. 
No.
Date of 
Meeting
Total No. of Directors 
of the Committee
No of Directors 
Present in the Meeting

1.
13.09.2023
4
4

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**Sr. 
No.
Name of Director 
(Shri/Smt.)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended**

1.
Dr. Rekha Jain
1
1

2.
K. G. Ananthakrishnan
1
1

3.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
1
1

4.
Gautam Guha
1
1

5.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
Nil
Nil

**3-4	 ukekadu ,oa ikfjJfed lfefr**

**laf{kIr fooj.k vkSj fopkjkFkZ fo"k;%**

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

**Ø-la-
funs'kd dk uke ¼Jh@Jherh½**

1.
tÇrnj Çlg ctkt
'ks;jèkkjd funs'kd] vè;{k

**foÙkh; o"kZ ds nkSjku vk;ksftr cSBdksa ds fooj.k%**

1.
13.09.2023
4
4

**cSBdksa esa 
mifLFkfr**

1.
M‚- js[kk tSu
1
1

2.
ds- th- vuar—".ku
1
1

3.
latho dqekj Çl?ky
1
1

4.
xkSre xqgk
1
1

5.
tÇrnj Çlg ctkt
'kwU;
'kwU;

----

**3.5	 Management Committee (MC)**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

The Committee has been constituted in terms of Clause 13 of 
Nationalized Banks (Management and Miscellaneous Provisions) 
Scheme, 1970/ 1980. The Committee considers following matters 
which are beyond the discretionary powers of MD & CEO/ Head 
Office Credit Approval Committee (HOCAC) III:

a)	
Sanctioning of credit proposals (Fund based & Non-Fund 
based)

b)	
Loan compromise/ write-off proposals

c)	
Proposal for approval of capital and revenue expenditure

d)	
Proposals relating to acquisition and hiring of premises 
including deviation from norms for acquisition and hiring of 
premises

e)	
Proposals relating to filing of suits/appeals, defending them 
etc.

f)	
Proposals for Investments in Government and other approved 
securities, shares and debentures of companies including 
underwriting

g)	
Proposals relating to Donations

h)	
Any other matter referred by the Board.

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

Sr. No.
Name of the Director (Shri/Smt.)

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Chairperson

2.
Kalyan Kumar
Executive Director, Member

3.
Binod Kumar
Executive Director, Member

4.
M. Paramasivam
Executive Director, Member

5.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
Executive Director, Member

6.
Uma Sankar
RBI Nominee Director, Member

7.
Dr. Rekha Jain
Shareholder Director, Member

Smt. Uma Sankar, RBI Nominee Director, was made member of 
the Committee w.e.f. 19.07.2023 in place of Shri Anil Kumar Misra, 
RBI Nominee Director, whose tenure completed on 14.07.2023. 
Dr. Rekha Jain ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 
19.07.2023.  

Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director, ceased to be a member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 01.09.2023 on account of his superannuation.

Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, Executive Director, was made 
member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.10.2023.

Dr. Rekha Jain, Shareholder Director, was made member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 01.01.2024 in place of Shri Pankaj Joshi, Part-
Time Non Official Director.

**Details of Meetings held during the financial year:**

No. of Meetings held: 25

**3-5	 çcaèku lfefr ¼,elh½**

**laf{kIr fooj.k vkSj fopkjkFkZ fo"k;%**

**ch½	 _.k le>kSrk@cês [kkrksa ds çLrko**

**Ã½	 eqdnek@vihy nk;j djus ls lacafèkr çLrko] mudk cpko djuk 
bR;kfn**

**th½	nku ls lacafèkr çLrko**

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

----

**Dates of Meetings:**

10.04.2023
26.04.2023
20.05.2023
29.05.2023
16.06.2023

27.06.2023
14.07.2023
25.07.2023
19.08.2023
29.08.2023

12.09.2023
27.09.2023
17.10.2023
25.10.2023
16.11.2023

30.11.2023
15.12.2023
28.12.2023
16.01.2024
20.01.2024

29.01.2024
15.02.2024
26.02.2024
19.03.2024
26.03.2024

**No. of Meetings attended by Member- Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**Sr. 
No.
Name of Director 
(Shri/Smt.)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
25
25

2.
Vijay Dube
10
9

3.
Kalyan Kumar
25
22

4.
Binod Kumar
25
25

5.
M. Paramasivam
25
22

6.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
11
7

7.
Anil Kumar Misra
7
6

8.
Uma Sankar
18
18

9.
Pankaj Joshi
18
18

10.
Dr. Rekha Jain
14
14

**3.6 The Head Office Credit Approval Committee (Level – III) 
	
(HOCAC- III)**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

The HO Credit Approval Committee Level III has been constituted in 
terms of the Nationalized Banks (Management and Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Scheme, 1970 and Department of Financial Services 
(DFS), Ministry of Finance (MoF) Notification No.13/1/2006 dated 
05.12.2011.	

The Committee considers the credit proposals of up to Rupees 
Eight Hundred Crore, in case of Banks having total business of 
more than Rupees Ten Lakh Crore (applicable to our Bank). The 
Committee also considers OTS/ Compromise/ Write off proposals.

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

Sr.No.
Name of the Director (S/Shri)

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Chairperson

2.
Kalyan Kumar
Executive Director, Member

3.
Binod Kumar
Executive Director, Member

4.
M. Paramasivam
Executive Director, Member

5.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
Executive Director, Member

6.
Chief General Manager/ General 
Manager (Credit) 
Member

7.
Chief General Manager/ General 
Manager (Finance)
Member

8.
Chief General Manager/ General 
Manager (Risk Management) 
Member

**cSBdksa dh frfFk;ka%**

10.04.2023
26.04.2023
20.05.2023
29.05.2023
16.06.2023

27.06.2023
14.07.2023
25.07.2023
19.08.2023
29.08.2023

12.09.2023
27.09.2023
17.10.2023
25.10.2023
16.11.2023

30.11.2023
15.12.2023
28.12.2023
16.01.2024
20.01.2024

29.01.2024
15.02.2024
26.02.2024
19.03.2024
26.03.2024

**cSBdksa esa 
mifLFkfr**

1.
vrqy dqekj xks;y
25
25

2.
fot; nqcs 
10
9

3.
dY;k.k dqekj
25
22

4.
fcuksn dqekj
25
25

5.
,e- ijef'koe
25
22

6.
fcHkq çlkn egkik=
11
7

7.
vfuy dqekj feJk
7
6

8.
mek 'kadj
18
18

9.
iadt tks'kh
18
18

10.
M‚- js[kk tSu
14
14

**3-6 çèkku dk;kZy; _.k vuqeksnu lfefr ¼Lrj&III½ 
	
¼ç-dk-_-v-l&III½**

**laf{kIr fooj.k vkSj fopkjkFkZ fo"k;%**

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

7.
eq[; egkçcaèkd@ 
egkçcaèkd ¼foÙk½
lnL;

----

**Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director, ceased to be a member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 01.09.2023 on account of his superannuation.**

**Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, Executive Director, was made 
member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.10.2023.**

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

**No. of Meetings held: 69**

**Dates of Meetings:**

01.04.2023
05.04.2023
15.04.2023
19.04.2023
27.04.2023

01.05.2023
04.05.2023
09.05.2023
16.05.2023
23.05.2023

31.05.2023
03.06.2023
07.06.2023
14.06.2023
20.06.2023

23.06.2023
27.06.2023
06.07.2023
12.07.2023
13.07.2023

18.07.2023
27.07.2023
02.08.2023
09.08.2023
11.08.2023

16.08.2023
21.08.2023
30.08.2023
05.09.2023
09.09.2023

13.09.2023
15.09.2023
20.09.2023
25.09.2023
30.09.2023

05.10.2023
10.10.2023
16.10.2023
25.10.2023
27.10.2023

01.11.2023
08.11.2023
14.11.2023
20.11.2023
30.11.2023

06.12.2023
11.12.2023
13.12.2023
19.12.2023
26.12.2023

01.01.2024
03.01.2024
10.01.2024
17.01.2024
24.01.2024

31.01.2024
03.02.2024
07.02.2024
14.02.2024
17.02.2024

22.02.2024
28.02.2024
02.03.2024
05.03.2024
13.03.2024

19.03.2024
22.03.2024
27.03.2024
30.03.2024

**No. of Meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**Sr. 
No.
Name of Director (S/Shri)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended**

**1.
Atul Kumar Goel
69
69**

**2.
Vijay Dube
28
19**

**3.
Kalyan Kumar
69
57**

**4.
Binod Kumar
69
64**

**5.
M. Paramasivam
69
58**

**6.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
31
26**

**3.7	 Special Committee of the Board to monitor the progress 
of Recovery**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

**The Committee has been constituted in terms of DFS, MoF letter 
F.No.7/112/2012-BOA dated 21.11.2012 and F.No.7/2/2015-
Recovery dated 01.01.2016 to:**

**
Review the ways and strategies to improve NPA management 
and effective utilization of various tools to expedite recovery.**

**
Monitor the progress of recovery in NPAs including prudential 
written-off accounts.**

**
Review the status of cases/RCs pending at DRTs/DRATs.**

**
Review the credit monitoring mechanism and status of 
irregular/weak accounts and the measures taken for prevention 
of NPAs.**

01.04.2023
05.04.2023
15.04.2023
19.04.2023
27.04.2023

01.05.2023
04.05.2023
09.05.2023
16.05.2023
23.05.2023

31.05.2023
03.06.2023
07.06.2023
14.06.2023
20.06.2023

23.06.2023
27.06.2023
06.07.2023
12.07.2023
13.07.2023

18.07.2023
27.07.2023
02.08.2023
09.08.2023
11.08.2023

16.08.2023
21.08.2023
30.08.2023
05.09.2023
09.09.2023

13.09.2023
15.09.2023
20.09.2023
25.09.2023
30.09.2023

05.10.2023
10.10.2023
16.10.2023
25.10.2023
27.10.2023

01.11.2023
08.11.2023
14.11.2023
20.11.2023
30.11.2023

06.12.2023
11.12.2023
13.12.2023
19.12.2023
26.12.2023

01.01.2024
03.01.2024
10.01.2024
17.01.2024
24.01.2024

31.01.2024
03.02.2024
07.02.2024
14.02.2024
17.02.2024

22.02.2024
28.02.2024
02.03.2024
05.03.2024
13.03.2024

19.03.2024
22.03.2024
27.03.2024
30.03.2024

**cSBdksa esa 
mifLFkfr**

**1.
vrqy dqekj xks;y
69
69**

**2.
fot; nqcs 
28
19**

**3.
dY;k.k dqekj
69
57**

**4.
fcuksn dqekj
69
64**

**5.
,e- ijef'koe
69
58**

**6.
fcHkq çlkn egkik=
31
26**

**3-7 olwyh esa çxfr dh fuxjkuh djus ds fy, cksMZ dh fo'ks"k 
lfefr**

**laf{kIr fooj.k vkSj fopkjkFkZ fo"k;%**

----

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

**Sr.No.
Name of the Director (S/Shri)**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Chairperson

2.
Kalyan Kumar
Executive Director, Member

3.
Binod Kumar
Executive Director, Member

4.
M. Paramasivam
Executive Director, Member

5.
Bibhu Prasad  Mahapatra
Executive Director, Member

6.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
Part Time Non-Official Director, 
Member

7.
Rekha Jain 
Shareholder Director, Member

**Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director, ceased to be a member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 01.09.2023 on account of his superannuation.**

**Dr. Rekha Jain, Shareholder Director, was made member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023 in place of Shri Gautam Guha, 
Shareholder Director, whose tenure completed on 05.10.2023.**

**Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, Executive Director, was made 
member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.10.2023**

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

**No. of Meetings held: 4**

**Dates of Meetings:**

**17.06.2023
24.07.2023
27.12.2023
15.02.2024**

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**Sr. 
No.
Name of Director  
(Shri/Smt.)
Meetings held during 
their tenure
Meetings 
attended**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
4
4

2.
Vijay Dube
2
2

3.
Kalyan Kumar
4
3

4.
Binod Kumar
4
3

5.
M. Paramasivam
4
3

6.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
2
1

7.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
4
4

8.
Gautam Guha 
2
2

9.
Rekha Jain
2
2

**3.8 Committee for Review of identification of Wilful Defaulters**

**and Non Cooperative Borrowers Classification**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

**The Committee has been constituted in terms of RBI Master Circular 
dated 01.07.2014 and letter dated 07.01.2015 to review the orders 
of the Committee which has identified wilful defaulters. Further, in 
terms of RBI notification no. DBR.No.CID.BC.54/20.16.064/2014-15 
dated 22.12.2014, it also reviews the decision of ‘Non-Cooperative 
Borrower Classification Committee’.**

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

**17.06.2023
24.07.2023
27.12.2023
15.02.2024**

**cSBdksa esa 
mifLFkfr**

1.
vrqy dqekj xks;y
4
4

2.
fot; nqcs
2
2

3.
dY;k.k dqekj
4
3

4.
fcuksn dqekj
4
3

5.
,e- ijef'koe
4
3

6.
fcHkq çlkn egkik=
2
1

7.
latho dqekj Çl?ky
4
4

8.
xkSre xqgk
2
2

9.
js[kk tSu
2
2

**3-8 bjknru pwddrkZvksa vkSj vlg;ksxh mèkkjdÙkkZvksa ds oxÊdj.k 
ds igpku dh leh{kk ds fy, lfefr**

**laf{kIr fooj.k vkSj fopkjkFkZ fo"k; %**

----

As per DFS Guidelines vide F.No. 16/19/2019-BO.I dated 19th 
November 2019, in place of two separate committees of Non-
Cooperative Borrower Classification Committee and Committee for 
review of identification of Wilful Defaulters, a single committee was 
constituted. 

Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:	

Sr.No.
Name of the Director (S/Shri)

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Chairperson

2.
Pankaj Joshi
Part Time Non-Official Director, Member

3.
Sanjeev Kumar 
Singhal
Part Time Non-Official Director, Member

4.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
Shareholder Director, Member

Shri Jatinder Singh Bajaj, Shareholder Director, was made member 
of the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023 in place of Shri Gautam Guha, 
Shareholder Director, whose tenure completed on 05.10.2023.

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

No. of Meetings held: 3

**Dates of Meetings:**

27.06.2023
16.11.2023
16.01.2024

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**Sr. 
No.
Name of Director  
(Shri/Smt.)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
3
3

2.
Pankaj Joshi
3
3

3.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
3
3

4.
Gautam Guha
1
1

5.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
2
1

**3.9 	 Special Committee of the Board to monitor and follow up 
Fraud Cases involving Rs.1.00 crore and above**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

The Committee has been constituted in terms of RBI Notification 
no. RBI/2004.15 DBS.FGV(F) No./1004/23.04.01A/2003-04 dated 
14.01.2004 for monitoring and reviewing all fraud cases of Rs.1.00 
crore and above, as well as cyber frauds irrespective of the amount, 
so as to:

	

Identify the systemic lacunae and put in place measures to 
plug the same.

	

Monitor progress of CBI/Police investigation, recovery & staff 
accountability.

	

Review the efficacy of the remedial action taken to prevent 
recurrence of frauds.

	

Put in place other measures as may be considered relevant to 
strengthen the preventive mechanism.

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

**Ø-la- funs'kd dk uke ¼Jh@Jherh½**

1.
vrqy dqekj xks;y
çcaèkd funs'kd ,oa eq[; dk;Zikyd 
vfèkdkjh] vè;{k

2.
iadt tks'kh
va'kdkfyd xSj&ljdkjh funs'kd] lnL;

3.
latho dqekj Çl?ky
va'kdkfyd xSj&ljdkjh funs'kd] lnL;

4.
tÇrnj Çlg ctkt
'ks;jèkkjd funs'kd] lnL; 

27.06.2023
16.11.2023
16.01.2024

**cSBdksa esa 
mifLFkfr**

1.
vrqy dqekj xks;y
3
3

2.
iadt tks'kh
3
3

3.
latho dqekj Çl?ky
3
3

4.
xkSre xqgk
1
1

5.
tÇrnj Çlg ctkt
2
1

**laf{kIr fooj.k vkSj fopkjkFkZ fo"k;%**

----

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

Sr.No.
Name of the Director (S/Shri)

1.
K. G. Ananthakrishnan
Non-Executive Chairman, 
Chairperson

2.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Member

3.
Kalyan Kumar
Executive Director, Member

4.
Binod Kumar
Executive Director, Member

5.
M. Paramasivam
Executive Director, Member

6.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
Executive Director, Member

7.
Pankaj Sharma  
Govt. Nominee Director, Member

8.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
Part Time Non-Official Director, 
Member

9.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
Shareholder Director, Member

**Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director, ceased to be member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 01.09.2023 on account of his superannuation.**

**Shri Sanjeev Kumar Singhal, Part-Time Non Official Director, was 
made member of the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023. Further, Shri 
Jatinder Singh Bajaj, Shareholder Director, was made member of 
the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023 in place of Shri Gautam Guha, 
Shareholder Director, whose tenure completed on 05.10.2023.**

**Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, Executive Director, was made 
member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.10.2023.**

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

**No. of Meetings held: 7**

**Dates of Meetings:**

27.04.2023
28.06.2023
12.09.2023
17.11.2023
27.12.2023

26.02.2024
20.03.2024

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**Sr. 
No.
Name of Director  
(S/Shri)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended**

1.
K. G. Ananthakrishnan
7
7

2.
Atul Kumar Goel
7
7

3.
Vijay Dube
2
1

4.
Kalyan Kumar
7
7

5.
Binod Kumar
7
7

6.
M. Paramasivam
7
7

7.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra   
4
3

8.
Pankaj Sharma
7
3

9.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
4
3

10.
Gautam Guha 
3
3

11.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
4
2

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

27.04.2023
28.06.2023
12.09.2023
17.11.2023
27.12.2023

26.02.2024
20.03.2024

**cSBdksa esa 
mifLFkfr**

1.
ds- th- vuar—".ku
7
7

2.
vrqy dqekj xks;y
7
7

3.
fot; nqcs
2
1

4.
dY;k.k dqekj
7
7

5.
fcuksn dqekj
7
7

6.
,e- ijef'koe
7
7

7.
fcHkq çlkn egkik=
4
3

8.
iadt 'kekZ
7
3

9.
latho dqekj Çl?ky
4
3

10.
xkSre xqgk
3
3

11.
tÇrnj Çlg ctkt
4
2

----

**3.10   I.T. Strategy Committee**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

The Committee has been constituted as per RBI Circular No. 
RBI/2010-11/494/DBS.CO.ITC.BC.No.6/ 31.02.008/2010-11 dated 
29.04.2011. The broad functions of the IT Strategy Committee of 
the Board are:

	

Approving IT Strategy and policy document.

	

Ensuring that the Management has put an effective strategic 
planning process in place.

	

Reviewing that the business strategy is indeed aligned with IT 
strategy.

	

Ensuring that the IT Organization structure complements the 
business model and its direction.

	

Ascertaining that Management has implemented processes 
and practices that ensure that IT delivers value to the business.

	

Ensuring IT investments represented in the IT budgets are 
acceptable.

	

Monitoring the method that Management uses to determine 
the IT resources needed to achieve strategic goals and provide 
high-level direction for sourcing and use of IT resources.

	

Ensuring proper balance of IT investments for sustained 
growth of the Bank.

	

Being aware about exposure towards IT risks and controls 
and evaluating effectiveness of Management’s monitoring of 
IT risks.

	

Assessing Senior Management’s performance in implementing 
IT strategies.

	

Issuing high level policy guidance (e.g. related to risk, funding 
and sourcing tasks).

	

Ensuring whether IT or business architecture is to be 
designed, so as to derive the maximum business value from 
IT overseeing the aggregate funding of IT at Bank level and 
ascertaining, if the Management has resources to ensure the 
proper management of IT risks.

	

Reviewing IT performance and contribution of IT to business 
goals.

The RBI, vide its Master Direction on Information Technology 
Governance, Risk, Controls and Assurance Practices dated 
07.11.2023, which shall come into effect from April 1, 2024, revised 
guidelines related to functions, constitution and frequency of IT 
Strategy Committee of the Board.

**3-10	  lwpuk çkS|ksfxdh dk;Zuhfr lfefr%**

**laf{kIr fooj.k vkSj fopkjkFkZ fo"k;%**

----

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

Sr.No.
Name of the Director (Shri/Smt.)

1.
Dr. Rekha Jain
Shareholder Director, Chairperson

2.
K. G. Ananthakrishnan
Non-Executive Chairman, Member

3.
Kalyan Kumar
Executive Director, Member

4.
Binod Kumar
Executive Director, Member

5.
M. Paramasivam
Executive Director, Member

6.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
Executive Director, Member

7.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
Part Time Non-Official Director, 
Member

8.
CIO (CGM-IT) 
Member

9.
Invitees: I.T. Advisor

Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director, ceased to be member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 01.09.2023 on account of his superannuation.

Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, Executive Director, was made 
member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.10.2023.

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

No. of Meetings held: 4

**Dates of Meetings:**

17.06.2023
28.08.2023
17.11.2023
16.02.2024

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

Sr. 
No.
Name of Director  
(Shri/Smt.)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended

1.
Dr. Rekha Jain
4
4

2.
K. G. Ananthakrishnan
4
4

3.
Vijay Dube
2
2

4.
Kalyan Kumar
4
4

5.
Binod Kumar
4
3

6.
M. Paramasivam
4
3

7.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
2
2

8.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
4
4

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

**Ø-la-
funs'kd dk uke ¼Jh@Jherh½**

1.
M‚- js[kk tSu
'ks;jèkkjd funs'kd] vè;{k

2.
ds- th- vuar—".ku
xSj&dk;Zikyd vè;{k] lnL;

3.
dY;k.k dqekj
dk;Zikyd funs'kd] lnL;

4.
fcuksn dqekj
dk;Zikyd funs'kd] lnL;

5.
,e- ijef'koe
dk;Zikyd funs'kd] lnL;

6.
fcHkq çlkn egkik=
dk;Zikyd funs'kd] lnL;

7.
latho dqekj Çl?ky
va'kdkfyd xSj&ljdkjh funs'kd] 
lnL;

8.
lhvkÃvks ¼lhth,e& 
vkÃVh½
lnL;

9.
vkeaf=r % vkÃ-Vh- lykgdkj

17.06.2023
28.08.2023
17.11.2023
16.02.2024

1.
M‚- js[kk tSu
4
4

2.
ds- th- vuar—".ku
4
4

3.
fot; nqcs
2
2

4.
dY;k.k dqekj
4
4

5.
fcuksn dqekj
4
3

6.
,e- ijef'koe
4
3

7.
fcHkq çlkn egkik=
2
2

8.
latho dqekj Çl?ky
4
4

----

**3.11  Customer Service Committee**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

The Committee has been constituted in terms of RBI letter dated 
14.08.2004 and RBI Master Circular dated July 01, 2015 to review 
customer service of the Bank on quarterly basis.

Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:	

**Sr.No.
Name of the Director (Shri/Smt.)**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Chairperson

2.
Kalyan Kumar
Executive Director, Member

3.
Binod Kumar
Executive Director, Member

4.
M. Paramasivam
Executive Director, Member

5.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
Executive Director, Member

6.
Pankaj Joshi
Part Time Non-Official 
Director, Member

7.
Dr. Rekha Jain
Shareholder Director, 
Member

8.
Invitees: (i) Customer Service - Specialist

                (ii) Customer Representative

Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director, ceased to be member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 01.09.2023 on account of his superannuation.

Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, Executive Director, was made 
member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.10.2023.

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

No. of Meetings held: 4

**Dates of Meetings:**

27.06.2023
11.09.2023
27.12.2023
20.03.2024

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

Sr. 
No.
Name of Director 
(Shri/Smt.)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended
1.
Atul Kumar Goel
4
4
2.
Vijay Dube
1
1
3.
Kalyan Kumar
4
4
4.
Binod Kumar
4
4
5.
M. Paramasivam
4
4
6.
Bibhu Prasad 
Mahapatra
2
2

7.
Pankaj Joshi
4
4
8.
Dr. Rekha Jain
4
4

**3.12	   Committee of the Directors to review Vigilance and Non-  
   Vigilance/ Disciplinary Action Cases**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

The Committee has been constituted in terms of Department 
of Economic Affairs, Banking Division –Vigilance Section, MoF 
communication no. 10/12/90/VIG/CVOs dated 24.10.1990 and 
reviews vigilance and non-vigilance disciplinary action cases.

**3-11  xzkgd lsok lfefr**

**laf{kIr fooj.k vkSj fopkjkFkZ fo"k;%**

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

27.06.2023
11.09.2023
27.12.2023
20.03.2024

2.
fot; nqcs
1
1

3.
dY;k.k dqekj
4
4

4.
fcuksn dqekj
4
4

5.
,e- ijef'koe
4
4

6.
fcHkq çlkn egkik=
2
2

7.
iadt tks'kh
4
4

8.
M‚- js[kk tSu
4
4

**3-12	lrdZrk vkSj xSj&lrdZrk@vuq'kklukRed dkjZokÃ ekeyksa 
dh leh{kk gsrq funs'kdksa dh lfefr**

**laf{kIr fooj.k vkSj fopkjkFkZ fo"k;%**

----

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

**Sr.No.
Name of the Director (S/Shri)**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Chairperson

2.
Kalyan Kumar
Executive Director, Member

3.
Binod Kumar
Executive Director, Member

4.
M. Paramasivam
Executive Director, Member

5.
Bibhu Prasad 
Mahapatra
Executive Director, Member

6.
Pankaj Sharma
Govt. Nominee Director, Member

7.
Uma Sankar
RBI Nominee Director, Member

Smt. Uma Sankar, RBI Nominee Director, was made member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 19.07.2023 in place of Shri Anil Kumar Misra, RBI 
Nominee Director, whose tenure completed on 14.07.2023. 

Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director, ceased to be member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 01.09.2023 on account of his superannuation.

Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, Executive Director, was made 
member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.10.2023.

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

No. of Meetings held: 4

**Dates of Meetings:**

30.05.2023
19.08.2023
28.12.2023
26.02.2024

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**Sr. 
No.
Name of Director  
(S/Shri)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
4
4

2.
Vijay Dube
2
2

3.
Kalyan Kumar
4
3

4.
Binod Kumar
4
4

5.
M. Paramasivam
4
4

6.
Bibhu Prasad 
Mahapatra
2
2

7.
Pankaj Sharma
4
1

8.
Anil Kumar Misra
1
1

9.
Uma Sankar
3
3

**3.13    Directors Promotion Committee**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

The Committee has been constituted in terms of Govt. of India , 
MoF, Department of Economic Affairs Letter No. F.No. 4/1/10/96-
IR dated 19.11.1997. Further, Govt. of India, Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Financial Services vide Letter No. 4/3/1/2012-IR 
dated 16.04.2019 issued guidelines regarding composition of 
Selection Committee for promotion from Scale VI to Scale VII. 

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

**Ø-la-
funs'kd dk uke ¼Jh@Jherh½**

30.05.2023
19.08.2023
28.12.2023
26.02.2024

**cSBdksa esa 
mifLFkfr**

1.
vrqy dqekj xks;y
4
4

2.
fot; nqcs
2
2

3.
dY;k.k dqekj
4
3

4.
fcuksn dqekj
4
4

5.
,e- ijef'koe
4
4

6.
fcHkq çlkn egkik=
2
2

7.
iadt 'kekZ
4
1

8.
vfuy dqekj feJk
1
1

9.
mek 'kadj
3
3

**3-13  funs'kdksa dh inksUufr lfefr**

**laf{kIr fooj.k vkSj fopkjkFkZ fo"k;%**

----

However, with the introduction of CGM (Scale VIII) level in large 
Banks having business of more than Rs.10 lakh crore, Govt. of 
India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services vide 
Letter No. F.No. 4/3/1/2012-IR dated 10.03.2021 conveyed that 
the Selection Committee specified vide letters dated 16.04.2019 
and 30.08.2019 shall be the Selection Committee for promotion of 
Officers to the highest level below the Bank’s Board (in case of 
Punjab National Bank - for promotion from Scale VII to Scale VIII).

Further, in order to bring uniformity, Govt. of India, Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Financial Services vide Letter No. F.No. 
4/3/1/2012-IR dated 01.02.2023 conveyed that the Selection 
Committee specified vide letters dated 16.04.2019, 30.08.2019 
and 10.03.2021 shall be the Selection Committee for promotion of 
Officers from Scale VI (DGM) to Scale VII (GM) and from Scale VII 
(GM) to Scale VIII (CGM).

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

Sr.No.
Name of the Director (S/Shri)

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Chairperson

2.
Pankaj Sharma
Govt. Nominee Director, Member

3.
Uma Sankar
RBI Nominee Director, Member

4.
Invitees: Two Experts

Smt. Uma Sankar, RBI Nominee Director, was made member of the 
Committee w.e.f 19.07.2023 in place of Shri Anil Kumar Misra, RBI 
Nominee Director, whose tenure completed on 14.07.2023.

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

No. of Meetings held: 2

**Dates of Meetings:**

16.03.2024
18.03.2024

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**Sr. 
No.
Name of Director 
(S/Shri)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
2
2

2.
Pankaj Sharma
2
2

3.
Anil Kumar Misra
Nil
Nil

4.
Uma Sankar
2
2

**3.14   Appellate Authority & Reviewing Authority Committee**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

The Committee has been constituted to consider Appeal  
and Review cases as Appellate Authority/ Reviewing Authority 
in terms of PNB Officer Employees’ (Discipline and Appeal) 
Regulations, 1977.

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

16.03.2024
18.03.2024

2.
iadt 'kekZ
2
2

3.
vfuy dqekj feJk
'kwU;
'kwU;
4.
mek 'kadj
2
2

**3-14  vihy çkfèkdkjh vkSj leh{kk çkfèkdkjh lfefr**

**laf{kIr fooj.k vkSj fopkjkFkZ fo"k;%**

----

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

Sr. No.
Name of the Director (Shri/Smt.)

1.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
Shareholder Director, Chairperson

2.
Pankaj Sharma
Govt. Nominee Director, Member

3.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
Part Time Non-Official Director, 
Member

4.
Dr. Rekha Jain
Shareholder Director, Member

Shri Jatinder Singh Bajaj, Shareholder Director, was made 
Chairperson of the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023 in place of Shri 
Gautam Guha, Shareholder Director, whose tenure completed on 
05.10.2023.

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

No. of Meetings held: 3

**Dates of Meetings:**

27.04.2023
24.07.2023
17.10.2023

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**S. 
No.
Name of Director 
(Shri/Smt.)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended**

1.
Gautam Guha
2
2

2.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
1
1

3.
Pankaj Sharma
3
3

4.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
3
3

5.
Dr. Rekha Jain
3
3

**3.15	   Steering Committee of the Board on HR**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

The Committee was constituted as per the DFS letter F.No.9/18/2009-
IR dated 21.10.2011 containing the recommendations of the 
Khandelwal Committee on Human Resources Issues of the Public 
Sector Banks, formed by the Govt. of India.

**Composition as on 31.03.2024:**

**Sr.No.
Name of the Director (Shri/Smt.)**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Chairperson                            

2.
Kalyan Kumar
Executive Director, Member

3.
Pankaj Sharma        
Govt. Nominee Director, Member

4.
Dr. Rekha Jain
Shareholder Director, Member

5.
Outside HR Expert
Member

Invitees(S/Shri):
Binod Kumar
M. Paramasivam
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra

Executive Director
Executive Director
Executive Director

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

No. of Meetings held: 6

**Dates of Meetings:**

17.06.2023
24.07.2023
11.09.2023
15.12.2023

31.01.2024
20.03.2024

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

**Ø-la-
funs'kd dk uke ¼Jh@Jherh½**

1.
tÇrnj Çlg ctkt
'ks;jèkkjd funs'kd] vè;{k

2.
iadt 'kekZ
ljdkjh ukferh funs'kd] lnL;

3.
latho dqekj Çl?ky va'kdkfyd xSj&ljdkjh funs'kd] lnL;

4.
M‚- js[kk tSu
'ks;jèkkjd funs'kd] lnL;

**cSBd dh frfFk%**

27.04.2023
24.07.2023
17.10.2023

17.06.2023
24.07.2023
11.09.2023
15.12.2023

31.01.2024
20.03.2024

----

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

S.No.
Name of Director  
(Shri/Smt.)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
6
6

2.
Vijay Dube 
(as alternate arrangement)
1
1

3.
Kalyan Kumar
5
5

4.
Pankaj Sharma
6
5

5.
Dr. Rekha Jain
6
6

**3.16  Committee to consider election of Shareholder Directors -**

**Voting by Public Sector Banks**

**Brief description and terms of reference:**

The Committee is constituted in terms of GoI, DFS letter dated 

03.04.2012 to decide on the candidates for election as Directors in 

entities in which Bank is holding a stake considering the profile and 

background of Candidates.

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

**Sr.No.
Name of the Director (S/Shri)**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Chairperson

2.
Kalyan Kumar
Executive Director, Member

3.
Binod Kumar
Executive Director, Member

4.
M. Paramasivam
Executive Director, Member

5.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
Executive Director, Member

Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director, ceased to be member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 01.09.2023 on account of his superannuation.

Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, Executive Director, was made 
member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.10.2023. 

No meeting of the Committee was held during FY 2023-24

**3.17   Performance Evaluation Committee**

The Committee has been formed as per DFS notification  
F. No. 9/5/2009-IR dated 30.08.2019, F. No. 9/5/2009-IR  
dated 14.11.2019, F. No. 9/5/2009-IR (Pt. II) dated 23.03.2021 and 
E.F. No. 9/5/2009-IR dated 06.02.2023. The Committee evaluates 
the performance of General Managers/ Chief General Managers 
and Executive Directors by setting up qualitative and quantitative 
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs). Also, the Committee proposes 
the KPIs for evaluation of performance of the Managing Director 
and CEO to the Board of Directors.

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

Sr.No.
Name of the Director (S/Shri)

1.
Shri K G Ananthakrishnan Non-Executive Chairman, 
Chairperson

2.
Pankaj Sharma 
Govt. Nominee Director, Member

3.
Pankaj Joshi
Part Time Non-Official Director, 
Member

4.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
Shareholder Director, Member

2.
fot; nqcs ¼oSdfYid 
O;oLFkk ds :i esa½
1
1

3.
dY;k.k dqekj
5
5

4.
iadt 'kekZ
6
5

5.
M‚- js[kk tSu
6
6

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

**Ø-la- funs'kd dk uke ¼Jh@Jherh½**

**Ø-la-
funs'kd dk uke ¼Jh@Jherh½**

1.
ds- th- vuar—".ku
xSj dk;Zikyd vè;{k]

2.
iadt 'kekZ
ljdkjh ukferh funs'kd] lnL;

3.
iadt tks'kh
va'kdkfyd xSj&ljdkjh funs'kd] lnL;

4.
tÇrnj Çlg ctkt 'ks;jèkkjd funs'kd] lnL;

----

Shri Jatinder Singh Bajaj, Shareholder Director, was made member 
of the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023 in place of Shri Gautam Guha, 
Shareholder Director, whose tenure completed on 05.10.2023.

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

No. of Meetings held: 4

**Dates of Meetings:**

28.06.2023
26.10.2023
27.12.2023
20.03.2024

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**Sr. 
No.
Name of Director 
(Shri/Smt.)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended**

1.
K. G. Ananthakrishnan
4
4

2.
Pankaj Sharma
4
3

3.
Pankaj Joshi
4
4

4.
Gautam Guha
1
1

5.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
3
3

**3.18   Business Review Committee**

The Committee has been formed as per the direction given by 
Board in its meeting held on 19.03.2020 and has been entrusted 
with the Board level review of all Business Verticals of the Bank.

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

Sr.No.
Name of the Director (S/Shri)

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Chairperson

2.
Kalyan Kumar
Executive Director, Member

3.
Binod Kumar
Executive Director, Member

4.
M. Paramasivam
Executive Director, Member

5.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
Executive Director, Member

6.
Pankaj Joshi
Part Time Non-Official Director, 
Member

7.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
Shareholder Director, Member

Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director, ceased to be member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 01.09.2023 on account of his superannuation.

Shri Jatinder Singh Bajaj, Shareholder Director, was made member 
of the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023 in place of Shri Gautam Guha, 
Shareholder Director, whose tenure completed on 05.10.2023.

Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, Executive Director, was made 
member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.10.2023.

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

No. of Meetings held: 4

**Dates of Meetings:**

27.06.2023
11.09.2023
17.11.2023
20.03.2024

28.06.2023
26.10.2023
27.12.2023
20.03.2024

**cSBdksa esa 
mifLFkfr**

1.
ds- th- vuar—".ku 
4
4

2.
iadt 'kekZ
4
3

3.
iadt tks'kh
4
4

4.
xkSre xqgk
1
1

5.
tÇrnj Çlg ctkt
3
3

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

**Ø-la- funs'kd dk uke ¼Jh@Jherh½**

27.06.2023
11.09.2023
17.11.2023
20.03.2024

----

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**Sr. 
No.
Name of Director  
(S/Shri)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
4
4

2.
Vijay Dube
1
1

3.
Kalyan Kumar
4
4

4.
Binod Kumar
4
4

5.
M. Paramasivam
4
4

6.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
2
2

7.
Pankaj Joshi
4
4

8.
Gautam Guha
2
2

9.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
2
1

**3.19   Capital Raising Committee of Board**

**The Committee has been constituted as per the direction given by 
Board in its meeting held on 09.07.2020 for deciding on various 
matters relating to raising of capital including but not limited to:**

**a)	
Issue and allotment of equity shares: type of issue, proportion, 
timing and price of issue, appointment of Lead Managers, 
Legal Advisors, Underwriters (as may be necessary) and 
all such Agencies as may be involved or concerned in such 
offering of Equity Shares and also to enter into and execute 
all such arrangement/agreements etc., with such Agencies 
and to seek the listing of Equity shares issued on the Stock 
Exchanges where the shares of the Bank are listed.**

**b)	
Finalizing/approving the quantum of capital to be raised 
through Basel III Compliant AT1/Tier II Bonds in one or 
more tranches, coupon, maturity, call option, timing, basis 
of allotment, allotment date and all pre-issue/post-issue 
formalities, modification in terms and conditions for the 
issuance of Bonds, appointment of Rating Agency/Trustee, 
Arrangers/Advisors and Registrar to the Issue.**

**Composition of the Committee as on 31.03.2024:**

**Sr.No.
Name of the Director (S/Shri)**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO, Chairperson

2.
Kalyan Kumar
Executive Director, Member

3.
Binod Kumar
Executive Director, Member

4.
M. Paramasivam
Executive Director, Member

5.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
Executive Director, Member

6.
Pankaj Joshi
Part Time Non-Official 
Director, Member

7.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
Part Time Non-Official 
Director, Member

**Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director, ceased to be member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 01.09.2023 on account of his superannuation.**

1.
vrqy dqekj xks;y
4
4

2.
fot; nqcs
1
1

3.
dY;k.k dqekj
4
4

4.
fcuksn dqekj
4
4

5.
,e- ijef'koe
4
4

6.
fcHkq çlkn egkik=
2
2

7.
iadt tks'kh
4
4

8.
xkSre xqgk
2
2

9.
tÇrnj Çlg ctkt
2
1

**31-03-2024 dh fLFkfr ds vuqlkj lfefr dh lajpuk%**

**Ø-la-
funs'kd dk uke ¼Jh@Jherh½**

1.
vrqy dqekj xks;y
çcaèkd funs'kd ,oa eq[; dk;Zikyd 
vfèkdkjh] vè;{k

2.
dY;k.k dqekj
dk;Zikyd funs'kd] lnL;

3.
fcuksn dqekj
dk;Zikyd funs'kd] lnL;

4.
,e ijef'koe
dk;Zikyd funs'kd] lnL;

5.
fcHkq çlkn egkik=
dk;Zikyd funs'kd] lnL;

6.
iadt tks'kh
va'kdkfyd xSj&ljdkjh funs'kd] lnL;

7.
latho dqekj Çl?ky va'kdkfyd xSj&ljdkjh funs'kd] lnL;

----

**Shri Sanjeev Kumar Singhal, Part-Time Non Official Director, was 
made member of the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2023 in place of Shri 
Gautam Guha, Shareholder Director, whose tenure completed on 
05.10.2023.**

**Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, Executive Director, was made 
member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.10.2023.**

**Details of meetings held during the financial year:**

Sr. 
No.
Date of 
Meeting
Total No. of Directors 
of the Committee
No of Directors 
Present in the Meeting

**1
16.01.2024
7
5**

**No. of meetings attended by Member-Directors during the 
Financial Year:**

**S. 
No.
Name of Director  
(Shri/Smt.)
Meetings held 
during their tenure
Meetings 
attended**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
1
1

2.
Vijay Dube
Nil
NA

3.
Kalyan Kumar
1
1

4.
Binod Kumar
1
1

5.
M. Paramasivam
1
0

6.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
1
0

7.
Pankaj Joshi
1
1

8.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
1
1

9.
Gautam Guha
Nil
NA

**foÙkh; o"kZ ds nkSjku vk;ksftr cSBdksa dk fooj.k%**

**1
16.01.2024
7
5**

2.
fot; nqcs
'kwU;
ykxw ugÈ

3.
dY;k.k dqekj
1
1

4.
fcuksn dqekj
1
1

5.
,e- ijef'koe
1
0

6.
fcHkq çlkn egkik=
1
0

7.
iadt tks'kh
1
1

8.
latho dqekj Çl?ky
1
1

9.
xkSre xqgk
'kwU;
ykxw ugÈ

----

1.
vrqy dqekj xks;y
çcaèk funs'kd ,oa eq[; 
dk;Zikyd vfèkdkjh

3931488.00
269280.00
160354.21

2.
dY;k.k dqekj
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
3557922.67
237060.00
100352.00

3.
fcuksn dqekj
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
3557922.67
237060.00
40525.95

4.
,e- ijef'koe
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
3552524.00
237060.00
74520.50

5.
fcHkq çlkn egkik=
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
1572693.16
107718.70
37896.95

6.
fot; nqcs$
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
6222573.33
100700.00
6610.80

¼ch½
cksMZ dh lfefr
35,000/-

2.
vfuy dqekj feJk
7,35,000/-

3.
iadt tks'kh
25,00,000/-

4.
latho dqekj Çl?ky
25,00,000/-

5.
xkSre xqgk
16,05,000/-

6.
M‚- js[kk tSu
25,00,000/-

7.
tÇrnj Çlg ctkt
9,55,000/-

,-	 31-03-2024 rd ofj"B çcaèku dk fooj.k%

----

**4.	
Remuneration of Directors:**

The Managing Director & CEO and the Executive Directors are being paid remuneration by way of salary as per rules framed by the 
Government of India. The details of remuneration paid to Whole Time Director(s) during the F.Y. 2023-24 are as under:

**Sr. No
Name (Shri)
Designation
Emoluments paid (₹)*
PF Contribution (₹)
Medical (₹)**

1.
Atul Kumar Goel
MD & CEO
3931488.00
269280.00
160354.21

2.
Kalyan Kumar
Executive Director
3557922.67
237060.00
100352.00

3.
Binod Kumar
Executive Director
3557922.67
237060.00
40525.95

4.
M. Paramasivam
Executive Director
3552524.00
237060.00
74520.50

5.
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
Executive Director
1572693.16
107718.70
37896.95

6.
Vijay Dube$
Executive Director
6222573.33
100700.00
6610.80

* includes Gratuity and Leave Encashment on retirement

$ Ceased to be director on 31.08.2023

Terms of appointment including service contracts and notice period are as per Government guidelines. No severance fee is payable to any 
Director. No performance linked incentive was paid to the whole-time directors during financial year 2023-24. Further, no stock options have 
been issued by the Bank to any of the Director.

The Bank does not pay remuneration to the Non-Executive Directors except sitting fees approved by the Board in terms of Government of 
India guidelines, for attending the meetings of the Board and its Committees. The fees payable is as under: - 

**Sr. No.
Meeting
Sitting Fees payable per Meeting  (₹)**

(a)
Board 
70,000/-

(b)
Committee of Board
35,000/-

(c)
For Chairing Board Meeting
20,000/- [in addition to (a) above]

(d)
For Chairing meeting of Committees
10,000/- [in addition to (b) above]

**The total Sitting Fee paid to the Non-Executive Directors during the Year 2023-24 is as under:**

**Sr. No.
Name of the Director (Shri/Smt.)
Sitting Fee paid (₹)**

1.
K. G. Ananthakrishnan
25,00,000/-

2.
Anil Kumar Misra
7,35,000/-

3.
Pankaj Joshi
25,00,000/-

4.
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
25,00,000/-

5.
Gautam Guha
16,05,000/-

6.
Dr. Rekha Jain
25,00,000/-

7.
Jatinder Singh Bajaj
9,55,000/-

Note: No sitting fee was paid to Whole Time Directors and Directors representing Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India except in case of Shri Anil 
Kumar Misra, RBI Nominee Director (tenure completed on 14.07.2023) who was eligible for receiving sitting fees as per terms of his appointment.

**5. 
Particulars of senior management including the changes therein since the close of the previous financial year:**

**a.	
Particulars of Senior Management as on 31.03.2024:**

**Sr. No.
Name (S/Shri/Ms.)
Designation
Place of Posting**

1.
Raghvendra Kumar
Chief Vigilance Officer
Head Office

2.
Dilip Kumar Jain
Chief Financial Officer - CGM
Finance Division, Head Office

3.
V Sundaresan
Chief General Manager
Credit Review and Monitoring Division, Head Office

4.
Sameer Bajpai
Zonal Manager- CGM
Zonal Office, Delhi

5.
Amit Kumar Srivastava
Group Chief Risk Officer- CGM
IRMD & FRMD, Head Office

6.
Hemant Verma
Chief General Manager 
IT Division, Head Office

----

42.
e`R;qat;
vapy çcaèkd &th,e
vapy dk;kZy;] y[kuÅ

----

**Sr. No.
Name (S/Shri/Ms.)
Designation
Place of Posting**

7.
Sanjay Varshneya
Chief General Manager
Operations Division, Head Office

8.
Rakesh Grover
Chief General Manager
SASTRA Division, Head Office

9.
Sanjeevan Nikhar
Group Chief Compliance Officer-CGM
Compliance Division, Head Office

10.
Rakesh Gandhi
Chief General Manager
Board & Co-ordination Division, Head Office

11.
Rajeeva
Chief General Manager
Corporate Credit Division, Head Office

12.
Sunil  Kumar Chugh
Chief General Manager
Financial Inclusion and RAM Division, Head Office

13.
Sumanta Mohanty
Zonal Manager- CGM
HRDD, Head Office

14.
Suresh Kumar Rana
Chief General Manager
HRDD, Head Office

15.
Firoz Hasnain
Zonal Manager- CGM
Zonal Office, Mumbai

16.
Sunil Kumar Goyal
Chief General Manager
Digital Banking Transformation Division, Head Office

17.
Sanjay Gupta
Chief General Manager
Inspection & Audit Division

18.
Sunil Agrawal
Chief General Manager
BA & RM Division, Head Office

19.
Sudhanshu Shekhar Das
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Patna

20.
Akhilesh Kumar Garg
General Manager
GBMD, Head Office

21.
Vadisetti Srinivas
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Raipur

22.
P Mahendar
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Kolkata

23.
Radha Krishan Bajpai
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Jaipur

24.
Shailendra Singh Bora
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Bhopal

25.
Parveen Goyal
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Amritsar

26.
Manish Agrawal
General Manager
Mission Parivartan, Head Office

27.
Prem Kumar Agrawal
General Manager
SMEAD, Head Office

28.
Kiran Kumar Tarania
General Manager
Treasury Division, Head Office

29.
Udaya Bhaskar Reddy Alturu 
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Bhubaneshwar

30.
Naresh Kumar Garg
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Shimla

31.
Sanjeev Kumar Dubey
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Meerut

32.
Debarchan Sahoo
General Manager
General Services Administration Division, Head Office

33.
M Swarajya Lakshmi 
General Manager
International Banking Division, Head Office

34.
Dipankar Mahapatra
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Ahmedabad

35.
Puskar Kumar Tarai
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Ludhiana

36.
Ajay Kumar Singh
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Varanasi

37.
Chittaranjan Prusty
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Guwahati

38.
Jan Mohammed
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Agra

39.
(Dr.)Rajesh Prasad
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Chandigarh

40.
Deepak Kumar Shrivastava
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Hyderabad

41.
Sachidanand Dubey
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Dehradun

42.
Mrityunjay
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Lucknow

43.
Sumant Kumar
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Durgapur

44.
Bhuvaneswari Venkatraman
Zonal Manager -GM
Zonal Office, Chennai

45.
Ashwini Kumar Pandey
General Manager (CISO)
Cyber And Information Security Division, Head Office

46.
Balbir Singh
Board Secretary
Board & Coordination Division, Head Office

47.
Ekta Pasricha
Company Secretary
Board & Coordination Division, Head Office

----

ch-	  ofj"B çcaèku esa ifjorZu dk fooj.k%

10.10.2023

6-	 foosdkèkhu vis{kkvksa dk vuqikyu

7-	 d‚iksZjsV vfHk'kklu vis{kkvksa ds vuqikyu dk çdVhdj.k%

----

**b.	
Details of change in Senior Management:**

**Sr.No.
Name of the 
Executive (S/Shri)
Designation
Previous Assignment
New Assignment
Effective Date**

**of Change**

1.
Sanjeevan Nikhar
Chief General Manager
Credit Review and 
Monitoring Division, HO
Compliance Division, Head 
Office
06.10.2023

2.
Mahendra Dohare
Chief General Manager
BA & RM Division, HO
Executive Director, Central 
Bank of India
09.10.2023

3.
V Sundaresan
Chief General Manager
Compliance Division, HO
Credit Review and Monitoring 
Division, Head Office
10.10.2023

4.
Sumanta Mohanty
Chief General Manager
GSAD, HO
HRD Division, Head Office
11.10.2023

5.
Firoz Hasnain
Zonal  Manager- CGM
Zonal Office, Kolkata
Zonal Office, Mumbai
11.10.2023

6.
Sunil Agrawal
Chief General Manager
Zonal Office, Kolkata
BA & RM Division, Head Office
12.10.2023

**6.	
Compliance of discretionary requirements**

**Sr. No.
Non Mandatory requirements
Status of implementation**

A
The Board – A Non-Executive Chairman may be 
entitled to maintain a Chairman’s office at the listed 
entity’s expense

The Board of the Bank has a Non-Executive Chairman who is provided 
with an office at Bank’s expense and he is allowed other expenses as per 
related guidelines and regulations.

B
Shareholders’ Rights – A half-yearly declaration 
of financial performance including summary of the 
significant events in last six-months, may be sent to 
each household of shareholders. 

The quarterly / Annual Financial Results are submitted to NSE/BSE, 
published in newspapers and placed on Bank’s website. Annual reports 
are also sent to the shareholders before the AGM in accordance with 
SEBI guidelines.

C
Modified opinion(s) in Audit Report – The listed 
entity may move towards a regime of financial 
statements with unmodified audit opinion.

The Bank’s Annual Financial Statements are unqualified.  Significant 
Accounting Policies and Notes to Accounts are contained in schedules, 
which are explanatory in nature.   

D
Reporting of Internal Auditor – The internal auditor 
may report directly to the Audit Committee.
Chief General Manager (Inspection & Audit) heading the Internal Audit 
function reports to the Audit Committee of Board.

**7.	
Disclosure of compliance with Corporate Governance Requirements:**

**Reg. No.
Title/Brief description
Compliance Status**

17
Board of Directors
The Bank is a body corporate constituted under the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970. The composition 
of the Board of Directors is governed by the provisions of Section 9(3) 
of the Act, whereby all the Directors are appointed/nominated by the 
Government of India except the directors elected from amongst the 
shareholders, other than Central Government. Further, the constitution 
and scope of the Committees of the Board is as per extant RBI/SEBI/
GoI Guidelines and other applicable guidelines as detailed in the Report 
above.

Significant time of the Board discussions/deliberations is spent on 
business strategy and execution, compliance, governance and risk 
management of the Bank.

Transparency and independence in functioning of the Board is ensured.

18
Audit Committee
Complied With

19
Nomination and Remuneration Committee
Complied With

20
Stakeholders Relationship Committee
Complied With

21
Risk Management Committee
Complied With

22
Vigil Mechanism
Complied With

23
Related Party Transactions
Complied With

----

**vuqikyu fd;k x;k**

**8-	 vke lHkk dh cSBdsa**

----

**Reg. No.
Title/Brief description
Compliance Status**

**24
Corporate governance requirements with respect 
to subsidiary of listed entity**

**Complied With**

**24A
Secretarial Audit
Complied With**

**25
Obligations with respect to Independent Directors
Complied With**

**26
Obligations with respect to employees including 
Senior Management, Key Managerial Persons, 
Directors and Promoters**

**Complied With**

**27
Other corporate governance requirements
Complied With**

**46 (2)
(b) to (i)
Website
Complied With**

**8.	
General Body Meetings**

**The details of Annual General Meetings (AGM) of shareholders during the last three years are as follows:**

**Type of 
Meeting
Day, Date & Time
Venue
Purpose**

20th AGM
Monday, July 26, 2021 
at 11.00 a.m.
The meeting was convened 
through 
Video 
Conferencing 
(VC) / Other Audio Visual Means 
with the deemed venue being 
the Head Office of the Bank

	
To discuss, approve & adopt the Audited Balance Sheet and Profit & 
Loss Account of the Bank for year ended 31.03.2021.

21st AGM
Thursday, June 30, 
2022 at 11.00 a.m.
The meeting was convened 
through Video Conferencing 
(VC) / Other Audio Visual 
Means with the deemed venue 
being the Head Office of the 
Bank

	
To discuss, approve & adopt the Audited Balance Sheet and Profit & 
Loss Account of the Bank for year ended 31.03.2022.

	
To declare dividend on the equity shares of the Bank for the financial 
year 2021-22.

	
To consider and approve the Material Related Party Transaction for 
outright securities transactions (sale/ purchase of securities), Money 
Market transactions, Primary subscription of securities, Security 
Arranger services in PNBs NCD issuances through EBP and also 
such other transactions as may be disclosed in the notes forming part 
of the Financial Statements for the relevant Financial Year with PNB 
Gilts Limited (Subsidiary), PNB Housing Finance Ltd. (Associate), PNB 
Metlife India Insurance Company Ltd. (Associate).

	
To consider and approve the Material Related Party Transactions for 
Loans and Advances with PNB Gilts Ltd. (Subsidiary) and PNB Housing 
Finance Ltd. (Associate).

	
To consider and approve the Material Related Party Transactions for 
IBPC Transactions with Regional Rural Banks (Associates).

	
To consider and approve the Material Related Party Transactions in the 
Current Accounts with PNB Gilts Ltd. (Subsidiary) and PNB Housing 
Finance Ltd. (Associate).

	
To consider and approve the Material Related Party Transactions in the 
Nostro Account with Druk PNB Bank Ltd. (International Subsidiary) & 
Everest Bank Ltd. (International Joint Venture).

22nd AGM
Friday, June 30, 2023 
at 11.00 a.m.
The meeting was convened 
through Video Conferencing 
(VC) / Other Audio Visual 
Means with the deemed venue 
being the Head Office of the 
Bank

	
To discuss, approve & adopt the Audited Balance Sheet and Profit & 
Loss Account of the Bank for year ended 31.03.2023.

	
To declare dividend on the equity shares of the Bank for the financial 
year 2022-23.

	
To consider and approve the Material Related Party Transaction for 
outright securities transactions (sale/ purchase of securities), Money 
Market transactions, Primary subscription of securities, Security Arranger 
services in PNBs NCD issuances through EBP and also such other 
transactions such as purchase/sale of Government Securities (G-Sec), 
Bonds/Debentures of PSUs, other bodies as may be disclosed in the 
notes forming part of the Financial Statements for the relevant Financial 
Year with PNB Gilts Limited (Subsidiary), PNB Housing Finance Ltd. 
(Associate), PNB Metlife India Insurance Company Ltd. (Associate).

----



----

**Type of 
Meeting
Day, Date & Time
Venue
Purpose**

	
To consider and approve the Material Related Party Transactions for 
Loans and Advances with PNB Gilts Ltd. (Subsidiary) and PNB Housing 
Finance Ltd. (Associate).

	
To consider and approve the Material Related Party Transactions for 
IBPC Transactions with Regional Rural Banks (Associates).

	
To consider and approve the Material Related Party Transactions in the 
Current Accounts with PNB Gilts Ltd. (Subsidiary) and PNB Housing 
Finance Ltd. (Associate).

	
To consider and approve the Material Related Party Transactions in the 
Nostro Account with Druk PNB Bank Ltd. (International Subsidiary) & 
Everest Bank Ltd. (International Joint Venture).

	
To consider and approve the appointment of Shri Atul Kumar Goel as 
Managing Director & Chief Executive Officer of the Bank.

	
To consider and approve the appointment of Shri Anil Kumar Misra as 
Director nominated by the Central Government on the recommendation 
of the Reserve Bank of India on the Board of the Bank.

	
To consider and approve the appointment of Shri Pankaj Sharma as 
Government of India Nominee Director on the Board of the Bank.

	
To consider and approve the appointment of Shri Binod Kumar as 
Executive Director of the Bank.

	
To consider and approve the appointment of Shri M. Paramasivam as 
Executive Director of the Bank.

	
To consider and approve the appointment of Shri K. G. Ananthakrishnan 
as Part-Time Non-Official Director and Non-Executive Chairman 
(Independent) on the Board of the Bank. (Special Resolution)

	
To consider and approve Issue of equity shares to Employees through 
Employee Stock Purchase Scheme (ESPS). (Special Resolution)

**Extraordinary General Meeting - The details of Extraordinary General Meetings (EGM) of shareholders held during the year ended 31st 
March, 2024, are as follows:**

**Sr.No.
Day, Date & Time
Venue
Purpose**

**1.
Wednesday, 
September 27, 2023 
at 11.00 a.m.**

**The meeting was convened 
through Video Conferencing 
(VC) / Other Audio Visual 
Means with the deemed venue 
being the Head Office of the 
Bank**

	
To elect ONE Director from amongst the Shareholders of the Bank, other 
than the Central Government, in respect of whom valid nominations 
are received in terms of Section 9(3)(i) of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 read with the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Nationalized Banks (Management 
& Miscellaneous Provisions) Scheme, 1970, the Punjab National Bank 
(Shares and Meetings) Regulations, 2000, SEBI (Listing Obligations 
and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015, as amended and 
RBI Master Directions on ‘Fit and Proper’ Criteria for Elected Directors 
on the Boards of PSBs issued vide Notification No. DBR.Appt.No: 
9/29.67.001/2019-20 dated August 2, 2019 and further amendments 
thereto, if any read with Guidelines dated March 25, 2015 and dated 
July 08, 2016 issued by Government of India for consideration as 
Non Official Directors in Public Sector Banks and further amendments 
thereto, if any.

	
To consider and approve the appointment of Smt. Uma Sankar as 
Director nominated by the Central Government on the recommendation 
of the Reserve Bank of India on the Board of the Bank.

**2.
Tuesday, March 05, 
2024 at 11.00 a.m.
The meeting was convened 
through Video Conferencing 
(VC) / Other Audio Visual 
Means with the deemed venue 
being the Head Office of the 
Bank**

	
To consider and approve raising of equity capital for an amount 
aggregating upto ₹7500 crore (including share premium) in one or more 
tranches during FY 2024-25 through Qualified Institutions Placement 
(QIP)/Follow-on Public Offer (FPO) or any other permitted mode or a 
combination thereof in such manner and on such terms and conditions 
as may be deemed appropriate, in accordance with the applicable Acts/ 
Regulations/Guidelines and subject to receipt of all requisite approvals 
and the shareholding of Govt. of India not falling below 52%.  

	
To consider and approve the appointment of Shri Bibhu Prasad 
Mahapatra as Executive Director of the Bank.

----

Postal Ballot - Bank has not conducted any business by way of 
postal ballot, during the financial year and at present no business is 
proposed to be conducted through postal ballot.

**9.	
Other Disclosures as per Schedule V {C(10)} of SEBI 
(LODR) Regulations, 2015**

9.1	 There has been no significant related party transaction during 
the year that may have had potential conflict of interest with 
the Bank. 

9.2	 The Related Party Transactions of the Bank as per RBI/ICAI 
guidelines are disclosed in the Notes on Accounts (in Schedule 
18) of the Balance Sheet as on 31.03.2024. The Policy on 
Related Party Transactions is available on the Bank’s website 
at https://www.pnbindia.in/Policies.html. It is established 
practice in the Bank that the Directors recuse themselves from 
the agenda of the Board and other Committees of the Board, 
when matters relating to them or their relatives are discussed.

9.3	 Details of penalties imposed on the Bank by SEBI/Stock 
Exchanges for non-compliance in respect of matters related to 
Capital Market during the last three years are as under:

2021-22
Nil

2022-23
Nil

2023-24
Nil

9.4	 The Bank has in place a Whistle Blower Policy and no person 
has been denied access to the Audit Committee.

9.5	 The status of compliance of Discretionary and Mandatory 
requirements is detailed at Points 6 & 7, respectively.

9.6	 The Bank has adopted a Code of Conduct for the Board 
of Directors and Senior Management, the text of which is 
available on the website of the Bank www.pnbindia.in. All 
the Directors and Senior Management have affirmed their 
compliance of Code of Conduct during the year under review 
and a Certificate affirming the same is given at the end of the 
Report.

9.7	 The ‘Policy for determination of material Subsidiary’ and ‘Policy 
on Related Party Transactions’ is available on the website of 
the Bank at https://www.pnbindia.in/Policies.html.

9.8	 Commodity Price Risks and Commodity hedging activities are 
Nil. 

9.9	  The Bank has not raised any equity capital during FY 2023-24.

9.10	We have obtained a certificate from the Company Secretary in 
Practice that none of the Directors on the Board of the Bank 
have been debarred or disqualified from being appointed or 
continuing as Directors of companies by the SEBI/Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs or any such Statutory Authority.

**9-	 lsch ¼,yvksMhvkj½ fofu;e] 2015 dh vuqlwph V {C(10)} ds 
vuqlkj vU; çdVhdj.k**

2021-22
'kwU;

2022-23
'kwU;

2023-24
'kwU;

----

9.11	 It is confirmed that there was no instance where the Board 
did not accept any recommendation of any Committee of the 
Board which is mandatorily required during the financial year 
2023-24.

**9.12	 The total fees for all services to Statutory Auditors of the 
Bank and its subsidiaries is as under:**

**Sr.No.
Name of the Entity
Amount  
(Rs. in Lakhs)**

1.
Punjab National Bank
4390.34

2.
PNB International Limited
561.81 

3.
PNB Gilts Limited
42.48 

4.
PNB Investment Services Limited
1.97 

5.
Druk PNB Bank Limited
3.25 

6.
PNB Cards and Services Ltd.
2.75 

**9.13	 Disclosures in relation to the Sexual Harassment of 
Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal) Act, 2013:**

a.
Number of complaints filed during FY 2023-24
29

b.
Number of complaints disposed off during 
FY 2023-24
22

c.
Number of complaints pending as on end of the 
FY 2023-24 
(within TAT as per provisions of PoSH Act, 2013)

07

9.14	 It is confirmed that Bank is complying with the disclosure 
requirements in respect of Corporate Governance Report 
as per sub-paras (2) to (10) of Schedule V of SEBI (LODR) 
Regulations.

9.15	 The securities of the Bank were not suspended from trading 
during FY 2023-24.

9.16	 Further it is confirmed that:

(i)	
In the opinion of the Board, the Independent Directors 
fulfill the conditions specified in SEBI LODR Regulations 
and are independent of the Management. 

(ii)	 None of the Directors are related inter-se.

(iii)	 The Bank conducts familiarization programmes for its 
Independent Directors, details of which are available on 
the website of the Bank i.e. at https://www.pnbindia.in/
Disclosures-in-terms-of-Regulation.html 

9.17	 There was no case of resignation of any Independent 
Director before the expiry of his/her tenure.

9.18	 Disclosure in respect of certain types of agreements disclosed 
under clause 5A of paragraph A of Part A of Schedule III of 
SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015, which are binding on the 
Bank: Nil

**Øekad
bdkbZ dk uke
jkf'k ¼#- yk[k esa½**

1.
iatkc uS'kuy cSad
4390.34

2.
ih,uch baVjus'kuy fyfeVsM
561.81 

3.
ih,uch fxYV~l fyfeVsM
42.48 

4.
ih,uch bUosLVesaV lÆolst fyfeVsM
1.97 

5.
Mªd ih,uch cSad fyfeVsM
3.25 

6.
ih,uch dkM~lZ ,aM lÆolst fyfeVsM
2.75 

,-
foÙkh; o"kZ 2023&24 ds nkSjku ntZ f'kdk;rksa dh la[;k
29

22

07

pnbindia.in/Disclosures-in-terms-of-Regulation.html ij 
miyCèk gSA 

----

**10.	 The Bank has four domestic Subsidiaries, namely:**

i)	
PNB Investment Services Ltd. 

ii)	
PNB Cards and Services Ltd. 

iii)	
PNB Gilts Ltd. 

iv)	 PNB Insurance Broking Pvt. Ltd.* 

*PNB Insurance Broking Company was in voluntary liquidation and capital 
stands extinguished and liquidator shall be completing the necessary 
formalities to conclude the winding up procedure. 

PNB Gilts Ltd. is a listed entity where the Bank has nominated two 
Directors on the Board of the Company.

Further, the Bank has two international subsidiaries, namely:

i)	
Punjab National Bank (International) Limited (PNBIL), UK

ii)	
Druk PNB Bank Ltd., Bhutan.

The Bank has no material subsidiary.

**11.	 Means of Communication**

The Quarterly/Annual Financial Results are submitted to the Stock 
Exchanges (NSE & BSE) for dissemination. Further, the Financial 
Results are also communicated to the stakeholders through news 
releases via print and electronic media.

Shareholder communications/notices and financial Results etc. are 
also published in widely circulated English and Hindi newspapers 
viz. Financial Express, Mint, Economic Times, Businessline, 
Business Standard, Navbharat Times and Jansatta.

The Quarterly/Annual Financial Results and presentations made to 
Institutional Investors/Analysts are also placed on the website of the 
Bank (www.pnbindia.in) besides the websites of Stock Exchanges 
viz. www.nseindia.com and www.bseindia.com.

The electronic copies of Annual Report for FY 2022-23 inter alia 
containing the Notice of AGM were sent to the shareholders only 
through email in accordance with SEBI Circular dated 13.05.2022 
and 05.01.2023 and was also hosted on the Bank’s website, 
besides the websites of the Stock Exchanges. 

The Annual Report for FY 2023-24 shall be sent by email to those 
shareholders who have registered their email ids pursuant to SEBI 
Circular(s) dated 13.05.2022, 05.01.2023 and 07.10.2023 read with 
SEBI Master Circular dated 11.07.2023. 

**12.	 General Shareholders’ Information**

**12.1	 Annual General Meeting of the shareholders of the Bank:**

The following is the schedule of the 23rd Annual General Meeting:

Day, Date & Time
Saturday, 29th June, 2024 at 11.00 a.m.

Venue
Through VC/OAVM (as detailed in the AGM 
Notice)

	
iii½	 ih,uch fxYV~l fyfeVsM

	
iv½	 ih,uch ba';ksjsal czksÇdx çkbosV fyfeVsM*

	
ii½	
Mªd ih,uch cSad fy-] HkwVkuA

**11-	lapkj ekè;e**

**12- vke 'ks;jèkkjdksa ds fy, lwpuk**

**12-1 cSad ds 'ks;jèkkjdksa dh okÆ"kd vke cSBd%**

----

**12.2	   Financial Calendar**

Financial Year
01st April 2023 to 31st March, 2024

Board Meeting for 
considering and 
approving the Audited 
Financial Results of the 
Bank for the quarter/
financial year ended  
31st March, 2024 

09th May, 2024

Date & Time of the  
23rd AGM
29th June, 2024 at 11.00 a.m. 

Record Date
22nd June, 2024

Book Closure Dates
23rd June, 2024 to 29th June, 2024

Cut-off Date for E-voting
22nd June, 2024

E- voting period
As per AGM Notice

12.3	 Dividend details – Financial Year 2023-24

(i)	
Dividend:- The Board of Directors of the Bank has 

recommended a dividend of ₹1.50 per equity share of ₹2/- 

each i.e. 75% of the paid up equity capital of the Bank for 

FY 2023-24.

(ii)	 Dividend Distribution Policy:- The Bank has formulated 

a Dividend Distribution Policy based on RBI / Government 

of India / SEBI Guidelines which is available at Bank’s 

website at https://www.pnbindia.in/Policies.html

**12.4	 Listing on Stock Exchanges:**

The shares of the Bank are listed on the following Stock Exchanges:

**Stock Exchanges
Stock 
Code
Date of Initial 
Listing**

National Stock Exchange of India 
Ltd. (NSE) 

Bandra - Kurla Complex, Mumbai

PNB
24.04.2002

Bombay Stock Exchange Ltd. (BSE) 

P. J. Towers, Dalal Street, Mumbai

532461
25.04.2002

**12.5	 Payment of Listing Fee**

The annual listing fee to NSE & BSE have been paid up to date.

**12.6 Dates of Book Closure and Cut-off date for remote**

e-voting- As per AGM Notice      

**12-2  foÙkh; dSys.Mj**

**9 eÃ] 2024**

**23 oÈ ,th,e dh frfFk 
vkSj le;
29 twu] 2024 iwokZà 11-00 cts**

**Ã&oksÇVx dh vofèk
,th,e uksfVl ds vuqlkj**

75% gSA 

pnbindia.in/Policies.html ij miyCèk gSA

**12-4  LV‚d ,Dlpsatksa esa lwphdj.k%**

**cSad ds 'ks;j fuEufyf[kr LV‚d ,Dlpsatksa esa lwphc) gSa%&**

PNB
24.04.2002

532461
25.04.2002

**12-5	  lwphdj.k 'kqYd dk Hkqxrku**

----

**12-7   cktkj ewY; ¼₹½MkVk@cSad ds 'ks;jksa dk çn'kZu***

eÃ&23
53.85
47.90
846358317
53.82
47.90
76194353
922552670

twu&23
53.25
49.70
645115297
53.23
49.70
55226339
700341636

tqykÃ&23
65.15
52.00
1793202010
65.15
52.00
108081893
1901283903

vxLr&23
64.20
58.55
988073844
64.15
58.60
68820361
1056894205

flrEcj&23
82.65
62.50
1967831474
82.60
62.51
111263279
2079094753

vDVwcj&23
83.50
67.35
1242014615
83.45
67.34
94028030
1336042645

uoEcj&23
80.80
72.65
732032044
80.85
72.71
68571596
800603640

fnlacj&23
97.70
78.05
1306358969
97.70
78.00
105275332
1411634301

tuojh&24
114.95
93.35
1482977508
114.95
93.40
126242783
1609220291

Qjojh&24
132.60
113.70
1788414453
132.60
113.70
106906620
1895321073

ekpZ&24
132.95
114.15
851114757
133.00
114.15
49209819
900324576

**dqy
 
 
13702072886
 
 
1015883653
14717956539**

*lzksr & ,u,lÃ@ch,lÃ osclkbV ¼www.nseindia.com / www.bseindia.com½

**12-8  cSad fu¶Vh dh rqyuk esa cSad ds 'ks;j dk çn'kZu%**

----

**12.7 Market Price (₹) Data / Performance of Bank’s shares***

**Month
NSE 
BSE 
COMBINED**

**HIGH
LOW
VOLUME
HIGH
LOW
VOLUME
VOLUME**

Apr-23
52.50
46.45
58579598
52.42
46.45
46063248
104642846

May-23
53.85
47.90
846358317
53.82
47.90
76194353
922552670

Jun-23
53.25
49.70
645115297
53.23
49.70
55226339
700341636

Jul-23
65.15
52.00
1793202010
65.15
52.00
108081893
1901283903

Aug-23
64.20
58.55
988073844
64.15
58.60
68820361
1056894205

Sep-23
82.65
62.50
1967831474
82.60
62.51
111263279
2079094753

Oct-23
83.50
67.35
1242014615
83.45
67.34
94028030
1336042645

Nov-23
80.80
72.65
732032044
80.85
72.71
68571596
800603640

Dec-23
97.70
78.05
1306358969
97.70
78.00
105275332
1411634301

Jan-24
114.95
93.35
1482977508
114.95
93.40
126242783
1609220291

Feb-24
132.60
113.70
1788414453
132.60
113.70
106906620
1895321073

Mar-24
132.95
114.15
851114757
133.00
114.15
49209819
900324576

**TOTAL
 
 
13702072886
 
 
1015883653
14717956539**

*Source - NSE/BSE website (www.nseindia.com / www.bseindia.com) 

The shares of the Bank were traded between a low of ₹46.45 and high of ₹133.00 during the financial year and total volume traded at NSE 
& BSE was 1471.79 Crore shares as against the floating stock of 295.69 Crore shares.

**12.8	 Performance of Bank’s share price in comparison with Bank Nifty.**

The graphical depiction of performance of Bank’s share vis-à-vis Bank Nifty is given below:

----

 12-9  çfr 'ks;j vkadM+k%

2021-22
2022-23
2023-24

vafdr ewY; (₹)
2/-
2/-
2/-

31 ekpZ dks can Hkko & ,u,lÃ (₹)
35.05
46.60
124.40*

vk; çfr 'ks;j (₹)
3.16
2.28
7.49

₹2/- ds çfr bfDoVh 'ks;j ij ykHkka'k
0.64
0.65
1.50

ykHkka'k (%)
32%
32.5%
75%

cgh ewY; (₹)
54.77
60.70
67.75

çnÙk ykHkka'k ('kq) ykHk dk %)
20.39%
28.55%
20.03%

* fnukad 28-03-2024 dks

12-10  'ks;j varj.k ,tsaV ¼,lVh,½

12-12  bySD‍Vªkfud oksÇVx%

----

**12.9	 Per Share Data:**

**2021-22
2022-23
2023-24**

Face Value (₹)
2/-
2/-
2/-

Closing Price as on 31st March -NSE(₹)
35.05
46.60
124.40*

Earnings per share (₹)
3.16
2.28
7.49

Dividend  per Equity Share of ₹2/- each
0.64
0.65
1.50

Dividend (%)
32%
32.5%
75%

Book Value (₹)
54.77
60.70
67.75

Dividend payout (% of Net Profit)
20.39%
28.55%
20.03%

* as on 28.03.2024 

**12.10	Share Transfer Agent (STA)**

M/s Beetal Financial & Computer Services (P) Ltd., a SEBI registered Registrar and Share Transfer Agent is the STA of the Bank since 
01.01.2013. The contact details of the STA are given below: 

Beetal Financial & Computer Services (P) Limited (Unit: PNB)

‘Beetal House’, 3rd Floor

99, Madangir, Behind Local Shopping Centre

New Delhi 110062

Tel. No. 011-29961281/82/83, Fax: 011-29961284

e-mail: beetalrta@gmail.com

**12.11	Share Transfer System**

(i)	
 In terms of Regulation 40(1) of SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations 2015, as amended, securities 
can be transferred only in dematerialized form w.e.f. April 1, 2019, except in case of request received for transmission or transposition 
of securities. Shareholders holding shares in physical form are requested to convert their holdings to dematerialized form.

(ii)	 The transmission or transposition of physical shares was effected in accordance with the applicable laws/guidelines.

(iii)	 Transfer of equity shares in electronic form is effected through the Depositories, i.e., National Securities Depository Ltd, (NSDL) 
and the Central Depository Services Ltd. (CDSL) with no involvement of the Bank.

(iv)	 For shares held in Dematerialized form, shareholders are requested to inform their Depository Participant (DP) directly for updating 
the records in case of any change in address and/or Bank mandate (Name of Bank, Address, Account No, MICR Code etc.).

(v)	 In accordance with SEBI Guidelines, the Bank has sent letters to the shareholders holding shares of the Bank in physical form with 
a request to update their contact details, Bank account details, nomination etc. 

**12.12	Electronic Voting:**

Shareholders are requested to register their latest email IDs with their Depository Participant(s) or the STA, as the case may be, for enabling 
remote e-voting facility. 

----

58
33500
351
59975
54
1323
463
94798

2
o"kZ ds nkSjku 'ks;j varj.k ds fy, 
vk, 'ks;jèkkjdksa dh la[;k

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

3
o"kZ ds nkSjku 'ks;jèkkjdksa dh la[;k 
ftudks 'ks;j varfjr fd, x,

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

4
o"kZ ds var vFkkZr 31-03-2024 ¼1&3½ 
dks cdk;k

**58
33500
351
59975
54
1323
463
94798**

**i½	 'ks;jèkkfjrk iSVuZ**

'ks;jèkkjdksa dh Js.kh
% èkkfjr bfDoVh 'ks;j
Hkkjr ds jk"Vªifr
73.15

,QvkÃvkÃ@,uvkjvkÃ@vkslhch
5.06

cSad@foÙkh; laLFkk,a@chek dEifu;ka
8.92

E;qpqvy Q.M
3.44

?kjsyw dEifu;ka@VªLV
0.52

Hkkjrh; tulkèkkj.k@fuoklh O;fä@,p;w,Q
8.90

lek'kksèku lnL;
0.01

**dqy
100.00**

ii½	 fnukad 31-03-2024 dks 'ks;jèkkjdksa dh la[;k%  	 24,13,083

**iv½ forj.k iSVuZ%**

2349531
97.37
5000 rd
446525544
893051088
4.06

38880
1.61
5001 ls 10000
138934295
277868590
1.26

14156
0.59
10001 ls 20000
103839884
207679768
0.94

3818
0.16
20001 ls 30000
47307395
94614790
0.43

2022
0.08
30001 ls 40000
36016341
72032682
0.33

1077
0.04
40001 ls 50000
24679241
49358482
0.22

1929
0.08
50001 ls 100000
68698895
137397790
0.62

1670
0.07
100001 vkSj mlls vf/kd
10145013963
20290027926
92.14

**dqy % 2413083 
100.00
 
11011015558
22022031116
100.00**

----

**12.13	PNB-Unclaimed Shares (Suspense) A/c: The details of unclaimed shares as per SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015 is as under:**

**Sr.No
Particulars**

**IPO (2002)
FPO (2005)
Unclaimed shares 
issued pursuant to 
Amalgamation (2020)#
TOTAL
No. of 
Share 
holders**

**No. of 
Shares 
No. of 
Share 
holders**

**No. of 
Shares
No. of 
Share 
holders**

**No. of 
Shares**

1
Opening at the beginning of the year i.e. 
01.04.2023 (Face Value Rs. 2/- each)
58
33500
351
59975
54
1323
463
94798

2
No. of shareholders who approached for 
transfer of shares during the year
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

3
No. of shareholders to whom shares 
were transferred during the year
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

4
Outstanding at the end of the year i.e. 
31.03.2024  (1-3)
58
33500
351
59975
54
1323
463
94798

# These shares relate to the unclaimed shares lying with the erstwhile Oriental Bank of Commerce and erstwhile United Bank of India and issued by PNB 
pursuant to amalgamation of both the Banks into Punjab National Bank on 01.04.2020.

* It is certified that the voting rights on these shares remain frozen till the rightful owner claims the said shares.

12.14	
Shareholding and Distribution Pattern as on 31st March 2024:

**i)	
Shareholding Pattern**

**Shareholders’ Category
Percentage of Equity shares held**

President of India
73.15

FIIs/NRIs/OCBs
5.06

Banks/Financial Institutions/ Insurance Companies
8.92

Mutual Funds
3.44

Domestic Companies/Trusts
0.52

Indian Public/Resident Individuals/HUF
8.90

Clearing Members
0.01

**Total
100.00**

ii)	
Number of shareholders as on 31.03.2024	
24,13,083

iii)	 Nominal value of each Equity Share 	
	
(₹) 2/-

**iv)	 Distribution Pattern:**

**No. of 
Shareholders
Percentage of Total
Shareholding of Nominal 
Value of (₹)
No. of Equity 
Shares
Amount (₹)
Percentage to 
Total**

2349531
97.37
Upto 5000
446525544
893051088
4.06

38880
1.61
5001 to 10000
138934295
277868590
1.26

14156
0.59
10001 to 20000
103839884
207679768
0.94

3818
0.16
20001 to 30000
47307395
94614790
0.43

2022
0.08
30001 to 40000
36016341
72032682
0.33

1077
0.04
40001 to 50000
24679241
49358482
0.22

1929
0.08
50001 to 100000
68698895
137397790
0.62

1670
0.07
100001 and above
10145013963
20290027926
92.14

**Total : 2413083 
100.00
 
11011015558
22022031116
100.00**

----

'kgj dk uke
bySD‍Vª‚fud
HkkSfrd :i esa
dqy
èkkjd
%
'ks;j
%
èkkjd
%
'ks;j
%
èkkjd
%
'ks;j
%
vgenkckn
53830
2.26
40005100
0.36
657
2.08
94096
1.14
54487
2.26
40099196
0.36
cSaxyksj
58099
2.44
34118571
0.31
652
2.07
190209
2.30
58751
2.43
34308780
0.31
pSUuÃ
41101
1.73
28616446
0.26
869
2.76
373089
4.51
41970
1.74
28989535
0.26
fnY‍yh
154386
6.48
8173680341
74.29
4360
13.83
953379
11.52
158746
6.58
8174633720
74.24
gSnjkckn
38343
1.61
23316037
0.21
620
1.97
178755
2.16
38963
1.61
23494792
0.21
dksydkrk
68026
2.86
55043010
0.50
1215
3.85
292747
3.54
69241
2.87
55335757
0.50
eqEcÃ
153000
6.42
2033237815
18.48
2299
7.29
558218
6.74
155299
6.44
2033796033
18.47
,ulhvkj ¼vU‍;½
73905
3.10
56160078
0.51
886
2.81
207517
2.51
74791
3.10
56367595
0.51
vU;
1740875
73.10
558559926
5.08
19960
63.33
5430224
65.60
1760835
72.97
563990150
5.12
dqy
2381565
100.00
11002737324
100.00
31518
100.00
8278234
100.00
2413083
100.00
11011015558
100.00

**Ø-la-
fooj.k
'ks;jèkkjdksa dh la[;k
'ks;jksa dh la[;k
'ks;jèkkfj‍rk dk %
1.
HkkSfrd #i esa
31518
8278234
0.0752**

**2.
MheSV #i esa
2381565
11002737324
99.9248**

**i)
,u,lMh,y
653852
2413729148
21.9210**

**ii)
lhMh,l,y
1727713
8589008176
78.0038
dqy (1+2)
2413083
11011015558
100.0000**

**12-17  IykaV dk LFkku% ykxw ugÈ**

**12-18  bfDoVh lacaèkh ekeyksa esa i=kpkj gsrq irk%
	
   daiuh lfpo**

**iatkc uS'kuy cSad**

**'ks;j foHkkx] cksMZ ,oa leUo; izHkkx**

**nwjHkk"k la- % 011- 28044857**

**Ã&esy % hosd@pnb.co.in**

----

**v)	
Geographical spread of Shareholders as on 31.03.2024:**

**CITY NAME
ELECTRONIC
PHYSICAL
TOTAL**

**HOLDERS
%
SHARES
%
HOLDERS
%
SHARES
%
HOLDERS
%
SHARES
%**

AHMEDABAD
53830
2.26
40005100
0.36
657
2.08
94096
1.14
54487
2.26
40099196
0.36

BANGALORE
58099
2.44
34118571
0.31
652
2.07
190209
2.30
58751
2.43
34308780
0.31

CHENNAI
41101
1.73
28616446
0.26
869
2.76
373089
4.51
41970
1.74
28989535
0.26

DELHI
154386
6.48
8173680341
74.29
4360
13.83
953379
11.52
158746
6.58
8174633720
74.24

HYDERABAD
38343
1.61
23316037
0.21
620
1.97
178755
2.16
38963
1.61
23494792
0.21

KOLKATA
68026
2.86
55043010
0.50
1215
3.85
292747
3.54
69241
2.87
55335757
0.50

MUMBAI
153000
6.42
2033237815
18.48
2299
7.29
558218
6.74
155299
6.44
2033796033
18.47

NCR (Others)
73905
3.10
56160078
0.51
886
2.81
207517
2.51
74791
3.10
56367595
0.51

OTHERS
1740875
73.10
558559926
5.08
19960
63.33
5430224
65.60
1760835
72.97
563990150
5.12

**TOTAL
2381565
100.00
11002737324
100.00
31518
100.00
8278234
100.00
2413083
100.00
11011015558
100.00**

**vi)	 Details of shares held by the Shareholders in Physical & Dematerialized form as on 31.03.2024**

**Sr. No.
Particulars
No.  of Shareholders
No. of  Shares
Percentage of Shareholding**

**1.
Physical
31518
8278234
0.0752**

**2.
Dematerialized 
2381565
11002737324
99.9248**

**i)
NSDL
653852
2413729148
21.9210**

**ii)
CDSL
1727713
8589008176
78.0038**

**Total (1+2)
2413083
11011015558
100.0000**

**12.15	The Bank has not issued any GDRs/ADRs/Warrants or any convertible instruments during the financial year 2023-24 and there are no 
outstanding GDRs/ADRs/Warrants or any convertible instruments as on 31.03.2024.**

**12.16	Commodity Price Risks are Nil. As regards foreign exchange risk and hedging activities:**

**
The Bank has in place a Board approved Investment Policy in line with the prudential guidelines/Bank’s Guidelines framed by Mid Office, 
Integrated Risk Management Division (IRMD) which defines potential future losses by fixing various limits such as cut loss/take profit 
limits (Dealer wise/Currency wise), Overnight/forward open positions etc. Exchange risk associated with intraday open position is also 
addressed by fixing Daylight Open Position limit. Foreign Exchange risk arising due to mismatch of foreign currency cash flow in different 
maturity buckets is addressed by limits such as IGL, AGL and VaR fixed and monitored by Mid Office, IRMD.**

**
All merchant (Export/Import/Inward remittance/Outward remittance) based transactions are hedged through OTC derivatives (swap and 
forward) in Interbank market based on the requirement of the customers.**

**
USD funds generated through FCNR/EEFC/RFC are naturally hedged as inflow and outflow of fund takes place in the same currency. 
Aforesaid deposits other than USD are converted into USD through currency swap mechanism and deployed profitably after taking swap 
cost into account.**

**
Bank has a robust and well defined MIS through which activities are placed before Top Management at all levels every day which has 
been defined in the Investment Policy.**

**12.17	Plant Location: N.A.**

**12.18	Address for Correspondence in respect of equity related issues:
	
The Company Secretary**

**Punjab National Bank**

**Share Department, Board & Coordination Division,**

	
2nd Floor, West Wing, Plot No.4, Sector-10, 

**Dwarka, New Delhi - 110075**

**Tel. No. : 011- 28044857**

**e-mail : hosd@pnb.co.in**

----

12.19	Online grievance redressal system:

The Bank provides an online query/grievance/complaint redressal 
system for resolving the shareholders’ queries/grievances. Under 
this system, the shareholder may log in their query/complaint 
through the Portal provided on Bank’s website www.pnbindia.
in under Investor info - > Others - > Online Shareholder queries/
requests/grievances. 

12.20	Secretarial Audit Report:

For conducting the Secretarial Audit for FY 2023-24, the Bank has 
appointed M/s Ashu Gupta & Co. (Practicing Company Secretary, 
New Delhi). The Secretarial Audit Report is annexed at the end of 
the Corporate Governance Report.

12.21	Debenture Trustee(s): The following are the Debenture 
Trustee(s) for the Bonds issued by the Bank:

1.	
IDBI Trusteeship Services Ltd:

    	 Universal Insurance Building, Ground Floor, 

	
Sir P M Road, Fort, 

	
Mumbai – 400 001. 

	
T: (91) (22) 40807000

	
Email ID: itsl@idbitrustee.com 

	
Website: www.idbitrustee.com 

2.	
SBICAP Trustee Company Ltd:

	
Mistry Bhavan, 4th Floor, 

	
122 Dinshaw Vachha Road, Churchgate,

	
Mumbai- 400020  

	
T: (91) (22) 4302 5555

	
Email Id: corporate@sbicaptrustee.com 

	
Website: www.sbicaptrustee.com 

3.	
Axis Trustee Services Ltd.:

	
The Ruby, 2nd Floor, SW, 

	
29, Senapati Bapat Marg, Dadar West,

	
Mumbai- 400 028

	
T: (91) (22) 6230 0451

	
Email Id: debenturetrustee@axistrustee.in 

	
Website: www.axistrustee.in 

12.22	List of all credit ratings along with revisions thereto:

a.	
Credit Rating of the Bank:

Rating Agency
Rating

Moody’s Investors Services
Baa3/P-3/Stable

Fitch Ratings
BBB-/F3/Stable

**12-19 v‚uykÃu f'kdk;r fuokj.k ç.kkyh%**

info - > Others - > Online Shareholder queries/requests/grievances 
ds varxZr viuh iwNrkN@f'kdk;r ntZ dj ldrs gSaA

**12-20 lfpoh; ys[kk ijh{kk fjiksVZ**

	
1-	 vkÃMhchvkÃ VªLVhf'ki lÆolst fyfeVsM%

**;wfuolZy ba';ksjsal fcÇYMx] Hkwry]**

**lj ih ,e jksM] QksVZ]**

**eqacÃ & 400001**

**Vsyh % ¼91½ ¼22½ 40807000**

	
	
Ãesy vkÃMh% itsl@idbitrustee.com

	
	
osclkÃV% www.idbitrustee.com 

**2-	 ,lchvkÃdSi VªLVh daiuh fyfeVsM%**

**feL=h Hkou] prqFkZ ry] 122 fnu'k‚ oPNk jksM]**

**ppZxsV] eqacÃ& 400020-**

**Vsyh% ¼91½ ¼22½ 4302 5555**

	
	
Ãesy vkÃMh% corporate@sbicaptrustee.com 

	
	
osclkÃV% www.sbicaptrustee.com 

**3-	 ,fDll VªLVh lÆolst fyfeVsM%**

**:ch] nwljh eafty] ,l MCyw]**

**29] lsukifr ckiV ekxZ] nknj if'pe]**

**eqacÃ& 400 028-**

**Vsyh% ¼91½ ¼22½ 6230 0451**

	
	
Ãesy vkÃMh% debenturetrustee@axistrustee.in

	
	
osclkÃV% www.axistrustee.in 

**,-	 cSad dh ØsfMV jsÇVx%**

**jsÇVx ,tsalh
jsÇVx**

ewMht bUosLVlZ lÆolst
Baa3/P-3/Stable

fQp jsÇVXl
BBB-/F3/Stable

----

**b.	
Details of Credit Rating obtained by the Bank during FY 
2023-24 for all domestic debt instruments (other than 
Fixed Deposits)**

**Ø- 
la-
Sr. 
No.**

**10.04. 2023**

**21.06. 2023**

**20.09. 2023**

**13.12. 2023**

**10.08. 2023**

**23.11. 2023**

**12.12. 2023**

**21.06. 2023**

**12.09. 2023**

**14.09. 2023**

**20.12. 2023**

**21.06. 2023**

**29.11. 2023**

**13.12. 2023**

1
,Vh@AT-1
J`a[kyk@Series 
VII

INE160A0 8076 AA/ 
Positive
AA/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable

2
,Vh@AT-1
 J`a[kyk@Series 
XII

INE160A0 8183 AA/ 
Positive
AA/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable

3
,Vh@AT-1
 J`a[kyk@Series 
XIII

INE160A0 8209
AA/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable

4
,Vh@AT-1
 J`a[kyk@Series 
XIV

INE160A0 8217
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable

5
,Vh@AT-1
 J`a[kyk@Series 
XV

INE160A0 8225
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable

6
,Vh@AT-1
J`a[kyk@Series 
XVI

INE160A0 8233
AA/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable

7
,Vh@AT-1
 J`a[kyk@Series 
XVII

INE160A0 8258 AA/ 
Positive
AA/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable

8
,Vh@AT-1
 J`a[kyk@Series 
XVIII

INE160A0 8266 AA/ 
Positive
AA/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable

9
,Vh@AT-1
 J`a[kyk@Series 
XIX

INE160A0 8282
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable

10
,Vh@AT-1
 J`a[kyk@Series 
XX

INE160A0 8290
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable

11
,Vh@AT-1
J`a[kyk@Series 
XXI

INE160A0 8308
AA+/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Stable

12
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III
J`a[kyk@Series 
XIV

INE160A0 8019*
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

13
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III
J`a[kyk@Series 
XV

INE160A0 8027*
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

14
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III
J`a[kyk@Series 
XVI

INE160A0 8035
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

15
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III
J`a[kyk@Series 
XVII

INE160A0 8043
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

16
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III
J`a[kyk@Series 
XVIII

INE160A0 8050
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

17
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III
J`a[kyk@Series 
XIX

INE160A0 8092 AA+/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

18
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III
J`a[kyk@Series 
XX

INE160A0 8142
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

19
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III
J`a[kyk@Series 
XXI

INE160A0 8159
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

----

**Ø- 
la-
Sr. 
No.**

**10.04. 2023**

**21.06. 2023**

**20.09. 2023**

**13.12. 2023**

**10.08. 2023**

**23.11. 2023**

**12.12. 2023**

**21.06. 2023**

**12.09. 2023**

**14.09. 2023**

**20.12. 2023**

**21.06. 2023**

**29.11. 2023**

**13.12. 2023**

20
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III
J`a[kyk@Series 
XXII

INE160A0 8167
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

21
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III
J`a[kyk@Series 
XXIII

INE160A0 8175
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

22
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III
J`a[kyk@
Series-VIII

INE695A0 9103*
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive

23
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III

27.10.2014
INE141A0 8019 AA+/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable

24
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III

26.10.2015
INE141A0 8035 AA+/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable

25
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III
J`a[kyk@Series 
XXIV

INE160A0 8191
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

26
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III

 J`a[kyk@Series 
XXV

INE160A0 8241 AA+/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

27
Vh;j@Tier II 
csly@Basel - III

 J`a[kyk@Series 
XXVI

INE160A0 8274
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

28
nh?kkZof/k ckW.M@
Long Term Bond
J`a[kyk@
Series 1

INE160A0 8068 AA+/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

29
nh?kkZof/k ckW.M@
Long Term Bond
J`a[kyk@
Series 2

INE160A0 8084 AA+/ 
Positive
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable
AA+/ 
Positive
AAA/ 
Stable
AAA/ 
Stable

30
tek izek.ki=@ 
Certicate of Deposit

A1+
A1+
A1+
A1+
A1+
A1+
A1+
A1+
A1+
 A1+
A1+
A1+
A1+

***Notes:**

**Ñrs iatkc uS'kuy cSad
For Punjab National Bank**

	

**¼vrqy dqekj xks;y½
(Atul Kumar Goel)**

	

**çca/k funs'kd ,oa eq[; dk;Zikyd vf/kdkjh
Managing Director & CEO**

***lwpuk%**

**LFkku% ubZ fnYyh
Place:  New Delhi**

**fnukad % 09-05-2024
Date:   09.05.2024**

----

**Declaration**

[As per Schedule V (D) of the SEBI  
(LODR) Regulations, 2015]

The Bank has laid down a Code of Conduct for all the Board 
Members and Senior Management Personnel of the Bank, which 
is available on the website of the Bank i.e. https://www.pnbindia.in/
model-code-of-conduct.html

The Board Members and Senior Management have affirmed 
compliance to the Code of Conduct in accordance with Clause 
26(3) of SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015.

	

For Punjab National Bank

	

(Atul Kumar Goel)
Managing Director & CEO 

Place:  New Delhi 
Date:   09.05.2024

**?kks"k.kk**

¼lsch ¼,yvksMhvkj½ fofu;eu]  
2015 dh vuqlwph V ¼Mh½ ds vuqlkj½

**—rs iatkc uS'kuy cSad**

**LFkku% uÃ fnYyh
fnukad % 09-05-2024**

----

**Q‚eZ ua- ,evkj&3**

**lfpoh; ys[kkijh{kk fjiksVZ**

**31 ekpZ] 2024 dks lekIr foÙkh; o"kZ ds fy,**

¼iii½	 fu{ksikxkj vfèkfu;e] 1996 vkSj mlds rgr cuk, x, fofu;e vkSj 
mifu;e(

**Form No. MR-3**

**SECRETARIAL AUDIT REPORT**

For the financial year ended 31st March, 2024

(Pursuant to Regulation 24A of the SEBI (Listing Obligations 
and Disclosure Requirements) 2015

To,

The Members,

**PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK,**

Head Office:  Plot No. 4,

Sector 10, Dwarka, New Delhi–110075

We have conducted the Secretarial Audit of the compliance 
of applicable statutory provisions and the adherence to good 
corporate practices by PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK (hereinafter 
called “the Bank”). Secretarial Audit was conducted in a manner 
that provided us a reasonable basis for evaluating the corporate 
conducts/statutory compliances and expressing our opinion 
thereon.

Based on our verification of the Bank’s books, papers, minute 
books, forms and returns filed and other records maintained 
by the Bank and also the information provided by the Bank, 
its officers, agents and authorized representatives during the 
conduct of Secretarial Audit, we hereby report that in our opinion, 
the Bank has during the audit period covering the Financial 
Year ended on 31st March, 2024 (‘Audit Period’), complied with 
the statutory provisions listed hereunder and also that the Bank 
has proper Board-processes and compliance-mechanism in 
place to the extent, in the manner and subject to the reporting 
made hereinafter.

We have examined the books, papers, minute books, forms 
and returns filed and other records maintained by the Bank for 
the financial year ended on 31st March, 2024 according to the 
provisions of:

(i)	
The Companies Act, 2013 (‘the Act’) and the rules made 
there under; (to the extent Applicable);

(ii)	
The Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (‘SCRA’) 
and the rules made there under;

(iii)	 The Depositories Act, 1996 and the Regulations and Bye-
laws framed there under; 

(iv)	 Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 and the rules 
and regulations made there under to the extent of Foreign 
Direct Investment, Overseas Direct Investment and 
External Commercial Borrowings; 

(v)	 The Regulations and Guidelines prescribed under the 
Securities and Exchange, Board of India Act 1992 (‘SEBI 
Act’) viz.: -

----

**¼,½	
iwath cktkj eè;LFkksa ij ;Fkk ykxw lsch }kjk tkjh 
fn'kkfunZs'k] fofu;e(**

**¼,Q½	 Hkkjrh; fjt+oZ cSad vfèkfu;e] 1934(**

(a)	
The Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(Substantial Acquisition of Shares and Takeovers) 
Regulations, 2011; 

(b)	
The Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(Prohibition of Insider Trading) Regulations, 2015; 

(c)	
The Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(Issue of Capital and Disclosure Requirements) 
Regulations, 2018; 

(d)	
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (Share 
Based Employee Benefits and Sweat Equity) 
Regulations, 2021;

(e)	
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Issue and 
Listing of Non-Convertible Securities) Regulations, 
2021;  

(f)	
The Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(Registrars to an Issue and Share Transfer Agents) 
Regulations, 1993 regarding the Companies Act 
and dealing with client; (to the extent applicable)

(g)	
The Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(Delisting of Equity Shares) Regulations, 2021; (Not 
applicable to the Bank during the audit period)

(h)	
The Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(Buyback of Securities) Regulations, 2018; (Not 
applicable to the Bank during the audit period)

(i)	
Securities 
and 
Exchange 
Board 
of 
India 
(Depositories and Participants) Regulations, 2018;

(vi)	 I further report that, having regard to the compliance 
system prevailing in the Bank and on examination of the 
relevant documents and records in pursuance thereof on 
test-check basis, the Bank has complied with the following 
specifically applicable laws to the Bank:

(a)	
Guidelines, regulations issued by SEBI as applicable 
to capital market intermediaries;

(b)	
Master Directions, Notifications and Guidelines 
issued by RBI from time to time;

(c)	
The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Act,1970;

(d)	
The 
Nationalised 
Banks 
(Management 
and 
Miscellaneous Provisions) Scheme, 1970;

(e)	
Punjab National Bank (Shares & Meetings) 
Regulations, 2000.

(f)	
The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 

----

**¼th½	 cSafdax fofu;eu vfèkfu;e] 1949(**

**¼,p½	 Hkqxrku ,oa fuiVku ç.kkyh vfèkfu;e] 2007**

**geus fuEufyf[kr ykxw [kaM ds vuqikyu dh Hkh tkap dh gS%**

(g)	
The Banking Regulation Act, 1949;

(h)	
Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007.

We have also examined compliance with the applicable clauses 
of the following:

(i)	
Secretarial Standards issued by The Institute of Company 
Secretaries of India. (Not applicable to the Bank, as the 
Bank is not a company incorporated under the provisions 
of Companies Act, 1956/2013)

(ii)	
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing 
Obligations & Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015

During the period under review and based on the information, 
explanations and management representation, the Bank has 
substantially complied with the provisions of the Act, Rules, 
Regulations, Guidelines, Standards, etc. mentioned above 
except to the extent as mentioned below:

a)	
In terms of Section 9(3)(e) of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, the 
Bank was required to have one Director, from among such 
of the employees of the Bank who are workmen under 
clause (s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, 
to be nominated by Central Government but the Position is 
vacant on the Board of the Bank.

b)	
In terms of Section 9(3)(f) of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, 
the Bank was required to have one Director, from among 
the employees of the Bank who are not workmen under 
clause(s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947, to be nominated by the Central Government after 
consultation with the Reserve Bank of India but the 
Position is vacant on the Board of the Bank.

c)	
In terms of Section 9(3)(g) of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, the 
Bank was required to have one Director who has been a 
Chartered Accountant for not less than fifteen years to be 
nominated by the Central Government after consultation 
with the Reserve Bank but the Position is vacant on the 
Board of the Bank.

d)	
In terms of Section 9(3) (h) of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, the 
Position one Director on the Board of the Bank is vacant.

e)	
As required under Regulation 18(1) (b) of SEBI (LODR) 
Regulations, 2015, the Bank did not have requisite number 
of independent directors on its Audit Committee i.e., at 
least two-thirds of the members of Audit Committee were 
not independent directors for the period 01.04.2023 to 
18.07.2023. However, with effect from 19.07.2023, the 
composition of the Audit Committee is in compliance of 
Regulation 18(1)(b) of SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015.

----

**ge ;g Hkh fjiksVZ djrs gSa fd %&**

**ge ;g Hkh fjiksVZ djrs gSa fd ys[kkijh{kk vofèk ds nkSjku%**

**We further report that**

The Bank is a body corporate constituted under the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 
1970, and the provisions relating to Corporate Governance 
and composition of Board as applicable to the Bank are 
provided in the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Act, 1970 read with The Nationalised Banks 
(Management and Miscellaneous Provisions) Scheme, 1970 
and other applicable guidelines. 

Subject to foregoing, the Board of Directors of the Bank is duly 
constituted with proper balance of Executive Directors, Non-
Executive Directors and Shareholder Director. The changes in 
the composition of the Board of Directors that took place during 
the period under review were carried out in compliance with the 
provisions of the aforesaid laws.

Adequate notice is given to all directors to schedule the Board 
meetings, notices were sent in advance generally and a 
system exists for seeking and obtaining further information and 
clarifications on the agenda items before the meeting and for 
meaningful participation at the meeting.

Decisions at the Board or Committee Meetings were carried out 
unanimously except in such case where dissent of Director(s) 
was recorded specifically.

Based on the compliance mechanism established by the 
Bank and on the basis of periodical review of compliance 
reports pertaining to all applicable laws laid before and taken 
note by the Board of the Bank, we are of the opinion that the 
management has adequate systems and processes in the 
Bank commensurate with the size and operations of the Bank 
to monitor and ensure compliance with applicable laws, rules, 
regulations and guidelines.

We further report that during the audit period:

1.	
The Bank has issued on private placement basis 7.74% 
Basel III Compliant Tier II Bonds (Series XXVI) of face 
value of Rs. 1 Crore each   aggregating to Rs. 3,090 Crore 
on 30.06.2023.

2.	
The Bank has issued on private placement basis 8.59% 
Basel III Compliant Additional Tier I Bonds (Series XIX) of 
face value of Rs. 1 Crore each aggregating to Rs. 3,000 
Crore on 27.09.2023.

3.	
The Bank has issued on private placement basis 8.55% 
Basel III Compliant Additional Tier I Bonds (Series XX) of 
face value of Rs. 1 Crore each aggregating to Rs. 1,153 
Crore on 28.12.2023.

4.	
The Bank has issued on private placement basis 8.47% 
Basel III Compliant Additional Tier I Bonds (Series XXI) of 
face value of Rs. 1 Crore each aggregating to Rs. 1,859 
Crore on 22.03.2024.

----

—rs vk'kq xqIrk ,aM daiuh
daiuh lfpo

LFkku% ubZ fnYyh
fnukad% 07@05@2024 	
	
	
	
	

	
	
	
	
	
	
	

	
vk'kq xqIrk
¼çksijkbVj½
,Qlh,l ua-% 4123 | lhih ua-% 6646
;wMhvkbZ,u% F004123F000325906 	
  ihvkj uacj% 730@2020

5.	
The Bank has redeemed 8.75% Basel III Tier II Bonds 
(Series VIII) of face value of Rs.10 lakhs each aggregating 
to Rs. 500 Crore on 26.06.2023.

6.	
The Bank has redeemed 9.65% Basel III Tier II Bonds 
(Series XIV) of face value of Rs.10 lakhs each aggregating 
to Rs. 1,000 Crore on 23.02.2024. 

7.	
The Bank has redeemed 9.68% Basel III Tier II Bonds 
(Series XV) of face value of Rs.10 lakhs each aggregating 
to Rs. 500 Crore on 28.03.2024.

8.	
The Reserve Bank of India vide speaking order dated 30th 

October 2023 imposed, a penalty of Rs. 72 Lakh (Rupees 
Seventy-Two Lakh only) on the Bank for non-compliance 
with certain provisions of 'Reserve Bank of India (Interest 
Rate on Deposits) Directions, 2016', 'Reserve Bank of 
India (Interest Rate on Advances) Directions, 2016' and 
'Master Circular on Customer Service in Banks'.

For Ashu Gupta & Co.
Company Secretaries 

Place: New Delhi
Date: 07/05/2024	

Ashu Gupta
(Prop.)
FCS No.: 4123 | CP No.: 6646
UDIN: F004123F000325906	
	
PR No.: 730/2020

Note: This Report is to be read with our letter of even date which 
is annexed as Annexure A and forms integral part of this Report.

----

vuqyXud&,

—rs vk'kq xqIrk ,aM daiuh

	
	
	
            daiuh lfpo

LFkku% ubZ fnYyh
fnukad% 07@05@2024 	
	
	
	
	

	
	
	
	
	
vk'kq xqIrk
¼çks-½
,Qlh,l uacj% 4123 | lhih uacj% 6646
;wMhvkbZ,u% F004123F000325906 	
ihvkj uacj% 730@2020

Annexure-A

The Members,
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK,
Head Office:  Plot No. 4
Sector 10, Dwarka, 
NEW DELHI–110075

Our Report of even date is to be read along with this letter.

1.	
Maintenance of secretarial record is the responsibility of the 
management of the Bank. Our responsibility is to express 
an opinion on these secretarial records based on our audit.

2.	
We have followed the audit practices and processes as 
were appropriate to obtain reasonable assurance about 
the correctness of the contents of the secretarial records. 
The verification was done on test check basis to ensure 
that correct facts are reflected in secretarial records.  We 
believe that the processes and practices, we followed 
provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.

3.	
The compliance by the Bank of applicable financial laws such 
as direct and indirect tax laws and maintenance of financial 
records and books of accounts has not been reviewed in 
this Audit since the same has been subject to review by 
statutory audit and other designated professionals.

4.	
Wherever required, we have obtained the management 
representation about the compliance of laws, rules and 
regulations and happening of events etc.

5.	
The compliance of the provisions of Corporate and other 
applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards is the 
responsibility of the management. Our examination was 
limited to the verification of procedures on test basis.

6.	
The Secretarial Audit Report is neither an assurance as 
to the future viability of the Bank nor of the efficiency or 
effectiveness with which the management has conducted 
the affairs of the Bank.

	
For Ashu Gupta & Co.
Company Secretaries 

Place: New Delhi
Date: 07/05/2024	

Ashu Gupta
(Prop.)
FCS No.: 4123 | CP No.: 6646

UDIN: F004123F000325906                          PR No.: 730/2020

----

Ñrs ,lth,l ,lksfl,V~l ,y,yih 
daiuh lfpo
,Qvkj,u L2021DE011600

----

CERTIFICATE OF NON-DISQUALIFICATION OF DIRECTORS
[Pursuant to Regulation 34(3) and Schedule V Para C clause (10)(i) of 
the SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements] Regulations, 2015)

To,
The Members of
Punjab National Bank
Head Office: Plot No. 4, Sector-10,
Dwarka, New Delhi - 110075

We have examined the relevant registers, records, forms, returns and disclosures received from the Directors of PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK 
having its Head office at Plot No. 4, Sector-10, Dwarka, New Delhi - 110075 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Bank’), produced before me by 
the Bank for the purpose of issuing this Certificate, in accordance with Regulation 34(3) read with Schedule V Para-C Sub clause 10(i) of the 
Securities Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015.

In our opinion and to the best of our information and according to the verifications (including Directors Identification Number (DIN) status 
at the portal (www.mca.gov.in) as considered necessary and explanations furnished to us by the Bank & its officers, we hereby certify that 
none of the Directors of the Bank as stated below for the Financial Year ending on 31st  March, 2024 have been debarred or disqualified 
from being appointed or continuing as Directors of companies by the Securities and Exchange Board of India, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, 
or any such other Statutory Authority:-

**Sr. No.
Name of the Director
DIN
Date of appointment in the Bank**

1
Sh. K. G. Ananthakrishnan
00019325
07.11.2022

2
Sh. Atul Kumar Goel
07266897
01.02.2022

3
Sh. Vijay Dube+
09107884
01.04.2020

4
Sh. Kalyan Kumar
09631251
21.10.2021

5
Sh. Binod Kumar
07361689
21.11.2022

6
Sh. M. Paramasivam
08997088
01.12.2022

7
Sh. Pankaj Sharma
-
11.04.2022

8
Sh. Anil Kumar Misra++
08066460
25.02.2022

9
Sh. Pankaj Joshi
06385037
21.12.2021

10
Sh. Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
00162680
21.12.2021

11
Sh. Gautam Guha+++
06894434
18.03.2021

12
Dr. Rekha Jain
01586688
12.09.2021

13
Sh. Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra
08756848
09.10.2023

14
Smt. Uma Sankar
-
14.07.2023

15
Sh. Jatinder Singh Bajaj
-
06.10.2023

+ ceased to be Director of the Bank upon completion of his tenure on superannuation on 31.08.2023.
++ ceased to be Director of the Bank w.e.f. 14.07.2023.
+++ ceased to be Director of the Bank upon completion of his tenure on 05.10.2023.

Ensuring the eligibility of the appointment/continuity of every Director on the Board is the responsibility of the Management of the Bank. Our 
responsibility is to express an opinion on these, based on our verification. This certificate is neither an assurance as to the future viability of 
the Bank nor of the efficiency or effectiveness with which the Management has conducted the affairs of the Bank.

For SGS ASSOCIATES LLP
Company Secretaries
FRN L2021DE011600

(CS D.P. GUPTA)
FCS: 2411
M.NO: 1509
ICSI PR: 5321 of 2023
Place: New Delhi
ICSI UDIN: F002411F000290512
Date: 2nd May 2024

----

BLANK PAGE

----

ANNUAL
REPORT

**Business
Responsibility &
Sustainability 
Report**

----

**Annexure II**

**BUSINESS RESPONSIBILITY & SUSTAINABILITY REPORTING FORMAT**

SECTION A offers a comprehensive overview of the entity, 
including its products and offerings, operational footprint, related 
parties, employees, Corporate Social Responsibility initiatives and 
transparency.

SECTION B details management and process disclosures related 
to the entity, highlighting the structures, policies, and processes 
implemented to adopt the NGRBC Principles and Core Elements.

SECTION C is designed to assist entities in demonstrating their 
performance in integrating the Principles and Core elements into key 
processes and decisions. The information is mapped to nine principles 
of NGRBC and is categorized into “Essential” and “Leadership” 
indicators.

**SECTION A: GENERAL DISCLOSURES**

**I. 
Details of the listed entity**

1. 
Corporate Identity Number (CIN) of the Listed Entity: The Bank 
is a body corporate constituted under the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970. The Bank is 
not a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956/2013 
and therefore the provisions of the Companies Act including 
with respect to requirement of CIN are not applicable to the 
Bank. The Bank has a CIN - ‘PUNB’ for the limited purpose of 
filing of IEPF forms on MCA portal. 

2. 
Name of the Listed Entity: Punjab National Bank 

3. 
Year of incorporation: Incorporated in 1895 and nationalized in 
1970 under the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970 

4. 
Registered office address: Punjab National Bank, Corporate 
Office, Plot No.4, Sector-10, Dwarka, New Delhi -110075

5.	
Corporate address: Punjab National Bank, Corporate Office, Plot 
No.4, Sector-10, Dwarka, New Delhi - 110075

6. 
E-mail: care@pnb.co.in 

7.	
Telephone: 011-28044436

8. 
Website: www.pnbindia.in

9. 
Financial year for which reporting is being done: FY 2023-24

10. Name of the Stock Exchange(s) where shares are listed: BSE 
Limited and National Stock Exchange of India Ltd. 

11. Paid-up Capital: 1101,10,15,558 Shares of face value of INR 2/- 
each amounting to Rs 2,202.20 Crore as on March 31, 2024 

vuqcaèk II

**dkjksckj mÙkjnkf;Ro ,oa fLFkjrk fjiksfVZax çk:i**

**[kaM ,% lkekU; çdVhdj.k**

**I- 	 lwphc) bdkbZ dk fooj.k**

**2-	 lwphc) bdkbZ dk uke% iatkc uS'kuy cSad gS**

6-	 bZ-esy% care@pnb.co.in 

**7-	 VsyhQksu% 011&28044436**

8-	 osclkbZV% www.pnbindia.in

----

**12.	 Name and contact details (telephone, email address) of the 
person who may be contacted in case of any queries on the 
BRSR report**

	
Name: Shri Deepak Singh

	
Designation: General Manager (Designate), Strategic 
Management and Economic Advisory Division

	
Telephone No.: 011-28044436

	
Email id: eicsmead@pnb.co.in

**13. Reporting boundary - Are the disclosures under this report**

made on a standalone basis (i.e. only for the entity) or on a 
consolidated basis (i.e. for the entity and all the entities which 
form a part of its consolidated financial statements, taken 
together). Disclosures made in this report are on a standalone 
basis focusing on the bank’s operation pan India across various 
business verticals. 

14.	 Name of assurance provider: M/s Ummed Jain & Co., Mumbai

15. 	 Type of assurance obtained: BRSR Core Indicators – Reasonable 
assurance; Select BRSR Indicators – Limited assurance

**II. 	 Products/services**

**16. Details of business activities (accounting for 90% of the**

**turnover):**

**S. 
No.
Description**

**of Main 
Activity**

**Description of Business Activity
% of**

**Turnover 
of the  
entity**

1.
Banking 
and 
Financial 
Services

The bank provides various banking 
products and financial services 
primarily including acceptance 
of various kinds of deposits like 
savings, term, current, recurring 
deposit etc. and credit financing. It 
basically includes following:

Retail Banking – PNB follows a 
customer-centric approach and 
strives to deliver efficient and 
personalized services to meet 
financial goals of the customer. 
These services include acceptance 
of deposits in form of savings and 
current account, fixed deposits, 
advancing of wide range of retail 
loans like home loans, car loans, 
education loans, personal loans, 
debit card, credit cards, prepaid 
cards, digital banking services like 
internet banking, mobile banking, 
etc. Additionally, various third 
party products like mutual funds, 
demat services, insurance plans 
are offered customized as per 
need so as to grow wealth and 
protect their assets.

100%

**uke% Jh nhid flag**

**VsyhQksu ua-% 011&28044436**

	
bZ-esy vkbZMh% eicsmead@pnb.co.in

II-   mRikn@lsok,¡  

16-	 dkjksckjh xfrfofèk;ksa dk fooj.k ¼VuZvksoj ds 90% ds fy, 
ys[kkadu½%

**Ø- 
la-
çeq[k 
xfrfofèk;ksa 
dk fooj.k**

O;kolkf;d xfrfofèk  
dk fooj.k
bdkbZ ds 
VuZvksoj 
dk %

1.
cSafdax ,oa 
foÙkh; 
lsok,¡ 

100%

----

Agriculture and Rural Banking – To 
cater to unique needs of farmers 
and agriculture sector, a range 
of services like crop loans, credit 
to agri-allied sectors, lending to 
SHGs, term loans and working 
capital facilities to the Food & Agro 
processing sector etc. are provided. 
The bank also supports farmers 
through its agriculture insurance 
schemes which covers crops, 
livestock, farm infrastructure. The 
bank is having rich network of 
branches ensuring convenience in 
agriculture banking services across 
the country uplifting farming 
community. The unbanked rural 
people are provided with Basic 
Savings Deposit Accounts, PMJDY 
Overdraft Facilities, Kisan Credit 
Card Scheme, Debt Swapping 
Scheme, SHG and various other 
credit products.

MSME Banking – PNB provides 
wide 
range 
of 
services 
like 
working 
capital 
loan, 
term 
loans, 
trade 
finance 
tailored 
made for supporting MSMEs. 
Bank 
facilitates 
women 
and 
marginalized 
communities 
by 
promoting 
entrepreneurship. 
Additionally, it aids MSMEs with 
digital banking services like fund 
transfers, banking apps etc.

Corporate Banking – The bank 
offers comprehensive range of 
products and services to cater to 
diverse needs of corporates and 
businesses. The services include 
working capital financing, term 
loans, corporate lending, treasury 
and advisory services etc. It also 
facilitates 
international 
trade 
transactions like import export 
financing, letter of credit, bank 
guarantees etc. Additionally, bank 
provides assistance to business 
to manage foreign exchange risk, 
interest rate risk, investment 
portfolios and provides guidance 
to clients to make informed 
decisions 
and 
achieve 
their 
financial goals.

----

**17. Products/Services sold by the entity (accounting for 90% of the 
entity’s Turnover):**

**S. No.
Product/Service
NIC 
Code**

**% of total**

**contributed**

**Turnover**

1.
Deposits (Current Deposits,
Term Deposits,
Recurring Deposits)

64191
100%
2.
Advances (Agriculture lending,
MSME Lending, Retail lending,
Corporate lending)

3.
Third Party Services

**III.  Operations**

**18. Number of locations where plants and/or operations/offices of**

**the entity are situated:**

Location
Number of plants
Number of offices
Total

National
Not Applicable*
10136 Branches, 12131 
ATMs, 1158 offices
23,425

International
Not Applicable*
Branches at: Dubai and 
Gift City, Ahmedabad
02

*Being a financial service entity this section is Not Applicable

19.	 Markets served by the entity:  

a.	
Number of locations 

**Locations
Number**

National (No. of States)
28 States & 7 Union Territories 
(except Lakshadweep)

International (No. of Countries)
1

b.	
What is the contribution of exports as a percentage of the total 
turnover of the entity? 

	
Not Applicable

c. 
A brief on types of customers  

	
Being a financial services organization the Bank caters to diverse 
range of customers:

	
In banking operation, the Bank caters to various types of customers 
including Individuals, Corporates, Farmers, Government, Start-
ups, MSMEs etc. and has a wide array of products and services 
for each segment. Our customers come from a wide spectrum 
of industries and backgrounds. The bank is continuously working 
to provide customer centric banking services to improve its 
processes and products and ensure inclusive growth. We cater to 
diverse range of customers including individuals, joint account of 
individuals, Non-resident individuals, partnership firm, societies, 
trust, associations, companies, MSMEs, Government, Large 
corporates etc. 

III- 	ifjpkyu

**LFkku
la;a= dh la[;k
dk;kZy;ksa dh la[;k
dqy**

jk"Vªh;
ykxw ugha*
10136 'kk[kk,a] 12131 
,Vh,e] 1158 dk;kZy;

23,425

02

*,d foÙkh; lsok laLFkk gksus ds dkj.k ;g [kaM ykxw ugha gS 

**19-	 bdkbZ }kjk lsok,a çnÙk cktkj%**

**d-	 LFkkuksa dh la[;k**

**[k-	 bdkbZ ds dqy dkjksckj esa fu;kZr dk çfr'kr ds :i esa 
;ksxnku D;k gS\**

**ykxw ugha**

**x-	 xzkgdksa ds laf{kIr çdkj**

----

**IV.  Employees**

**20. 	 Details as at the end of Financial Year:**

**a. 
Employees and workers (including differently abled):**

**S.  
No.
Particulars
Total (A)
Male
Female**

**No. (B)
% (B / A)
No. (C)
% (C / A)**

**EMPLOYEES**

1.
Permanent (D)
102349
77359
75.58%
24990
24.42%

2.
Other than 
Permanent (E)
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

3.
Total employees
(D + E)
102349
77359
75.58%
24990
24.42%

WORKERS
4.
Permanent (F)
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

5.
Other than 
Permanent (G)
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

6.
Total workers 
(F + G)
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

**b. 
Differently abled Employees and workers:**

**S. 
No.
Particulars
Total (A)
Male
Female**

**No. (B)
% (B / A)
No. (C)
% (C / A)**

**DIFFERENTLY ABLED EMPLOYEES**

1.
Permanent (D)
2878
2366
82.21%
512
17.79%

2.
Other than 
Permanent (E)
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

3.
Total differently 
abled employees
(D + E)
2878
2366
82.21%
512
17.79%

**DIFFERENTLY ABLED WORKERS**

4.
Permanent (F)
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

5.
Other than 
Permanent (G)
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

6.
Total differently 
abled employees 
(F + G)
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

**21.  Participation/Inclusion/Representation of women**

**Total 
(A)
No. and percentage of Females**

**No. (B)
% (B / A)**

Board of Directors
12
2
16.67

Key Management Personnel
 7
1
   14.29

**22.  Turnover rate for permanent employees and workers 
(Disclose trends for the past 3 years)**

FY 2023-24
(Turnover rate in 

current FY)

FY 2022-23
(Turnover rate in 

previous FY)

FY 2021-22
(Turnover rate in 

the year prior to the 

previous FY)

Male Female
Total
Male Female
Total
Male Female
Total

Permanent
Employees
3.92%
2.86%
3.66%
4.48%
3.21%
4.17%
5.24%
3.77%
4.89%

Permanent
Workers
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

**IV- 	deZpkjh**

**Ø- 
la-
fooj.k
dqy ¼,½
iq#"k
efgyk**

**la- ¼ch½
% ¼ch@,½
la- ¼lh½
% ¼lh@,½**

deZpkjh
1.  LFkk;h ¼Mh½
102349
77359
75.58%
24990
24.42%

**2. LFkk;h ds vykok 
¼bZ½
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha**

3. dqy deZpkjh
¼Mh$bZ½
102349
77359
75.58%
24990
24.42%

**dkexkj
4. LFkk;h ,Q½
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha**

**5. LFkk;h ds vykok 
¼th½
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha**

**6. dqy dkexkj
¼,Q$th½
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha**

**[k-	 fnO;kax deZpkjh vkSj dkexkj%**

**Ø- 
la-
fooj.k
dqy ¼,½
iq#"k
efgyk**

**la- ¼ch½
% ¼ch@,½
la- ¼lh½
% ¼lh@,½**

fnO;kax dkexkj
1.  LFkk;h ¼Mh½
2878
2366
82.21%
512
17.79%

**2. LFkk;h ds  
vykok ¼bZ½
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha**

3.
iwjh rjg ls 
fnO;kax dkexkj
¼,Q$th½
2878
2366
82.21%
512
17.79%

**fnO;kax dkexkj
4.  LFkk;h ¼,Q½
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha**

**5. LFkk;h ds vykok 
¼th½
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha**

**6.
iwjh rjg ls 
fnO;kax dkexkj
¼,Q$th½
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha**

**21- 	efgykvksa dh Hkkxhnkjh@lekos'ku@çfrfufèkRo**

**dqy ¼,½
efgykvksa dh la[;k ,oa çfr'kr**

la[;k ¼ch½
% ¼ch@,½
funs'kd eaMy
12
2
16.67

çeq[k çcaèku dkfeZd
 7
1
   14.29

LFkk;h 
deZpkjh
3.92% 2.86% 3.66% 4.48% 3.21% 4.17% 5.24% 3.77% 4.89%

**LFkk;h 
dkexkj
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha**

----

**V.  
Holding, Subsidiary and Associate Companies (including joint 
ventures)**

**23.  (a) Names of holding / subsidiary / associate companies /**

**joint ventures**

**S.
No.
Name of the holding /**

**subsidiary / associate**

**companies /**

**joint ventures
(A)**

**Indicate 
whether 
holding/**

**Subsidiary/**

**Associate/**

**Joint Venture**

**% of  
shares  
held by
listed 
entity**

**Does the entity**

**indicated at 
column A,**

**participate in**

**the Business**

**Responsibility**

**initiatives of the**

**listed entity?
(Yes/No)**

1.
Punjab National Bank 
International Ltd. (PNBIL)
Subsidiary
100.00
No

2.
DRUK PNB Bank Ltd, Bhutan
Subsidiary
51.00
No
3.
Everest Bank Ltd.
Joint Venture
20.02
No
4.
PNB Investment Services Ltd.
Subsidiary
100.00
No
5.
PNB Cards & Services Ltd.
Subsidiary
100.00
No
6.
PNB Gilts Ltd.
Subsidiary
74.07
No
7.
PNB Housing Finance Ltd.
Associate
28.13
No
8.
PNB MetLife India Insurance 
Co. Ltd.
Associate
30.00
No

9.
Canara HSBC Life Insurance 
Co. Ltd.
Associate
23.00
No

10.
India SME Asset 
Reconstruction Co. Ltd.
Associate
20.90
No

11.
Dakshin Bihar Gramin Bank, 
Patna
Associate
35.00
No

12.
Sarva Haryana Gramin Bank, 
Rohtak
Associate
35.00
No

13.
Himachal Gramin Bank, Mandi
Associate
35.00
No
14.
Punjab Gramin Bank, 
Kapurthala
Associate
35.00
No

15.
Prathama UP Gramin Bank, 
Meerut 
Associate
35.00
No

16.
Assam Gramin Vikash Bank, 
Assam
Associate
35.00
No

17.
Bangiya Gramin Vikash Bank, 
West Bengal
Associate
35.00
No

18.
Tripura Gramin Bank, Agartala
Associate
35.00
No
19.
Manipur Rural Bank, Imphal
Associate
35.00
No

**VI. 	 CSR Details
24. 	 (i)	
Whether CSR is applicable as per section 135 of Companies 
Act, 2013: (Yes/No)**

**No, CSR provisions are not applicable to Punjab National 
Bank, as per Section 135 of Companies Act. However, as 
a socially responsible institution committed to strengthen 
social ties with the community at large, the bank has a 
board approved Policy on CSR which is reviewed annually. It 
is guided by Schedule VII of the Companies Act 2013 under 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs concerning Corporate Social 
Responsibility. Our CSR activities are driven by the primary 
motive of giving back to society and uplifting communities. 
The activities executed under CSR are at Point 6 of Principle 
8 of this report.**

**(ii)	 Turnover (in Rs.) – Rs.120285 Crore (Turnover Represents  
	
Total Income)**

**(iii)	 Net worth (in Rs.) – Rs.74600 Crore**

**ds uke**

**bafxr djsa 
fd D;k 
gksfYMax@ 
vuq"kaxh@ 
lg;ksxh@
la;qä osaplZ 
gS**

**lwphc) 
bdkbZ  
}kjk 
èkkfjr 
'ks;jksa 
dk %**

7.
ih,uch gkmflax Qkbusal 
fyfeVsM
lg;ksxh 
28.13
ugha 

8.
ih,uch esVykbQ bafM;k ba';ksjsal 
daiuh fyfeVsM
lg;ksxh
30.00
ugha 

9.
dsujk ,p,lchlh ykbQ ba';ksjsal 
daiuh fyfeVsM
lg;ksxh
23.00
ugha 

11.
nf{k.k fcgkj xzkeh.k cSad] iVuk
lg;ksxh
35.00
ugha 

12.
loZ gfj;k.kk xzkeh.k cSad] jksgrd lg;ksxh
35.00
ugha 
13.
fgekpy xzkeh.k cSad] eaMh
lg;ksxh
35.00
ugha 

14.
iatkc xzkeh.k cSad] diwjFkyk 
lg;ksxh
35.00
ugha 

15.
çFkek ;wih xzkeh.k cSad] esjB  
lg;ksxh
35.00
ugha 
16.
vklke xzkeh.k fodkl cSad] 
vklke
lg;ksxh
35.00
ugha 

17.
cafx;k xzkeh.k fodkl cSad] 
if'pe caxky 
lg;ksxh
35.00
ugha 

18.
f=iqjk xzkeh.k cSad] vxjryk 
lg;ksxh
35.00
ugha 

19.
ef.kiqj xzkeh.k cSad] bEQky
lg;ksxh
35.00
ugha 

----

VII-	 ikjnf'kZrk vkSj çdVhdj.k vuqikyu

fgrèkkjd lewg 
ftlls f'kdk;r 
çkIr gqbZ gS

LFkkfir f'kdk;r fuokj.k 
ra= ¼gk¡@ugha½ 

¼;fn gka] rks f'kdk;r 
fuokj.k uhfr ds fy, 
osc&fyad çnku djsa½

o"kZ ds var 
esa lekèkku 
yafcr 
f'kdk;rksa 
dh la[;k

fVIif.k;ka	

o"kZ ds 
nkSjku ntZ 
dh xbZ 
f'kdk;rksa 
dh la[;k

o"kZ ds var 
esa lekèkku 
yafcr 
f'kdk;rksa dh 
la[;k

fVIif.k;ka

leqnk;
'kwU;
fuos'kdksa ¼'ks;jèkkjdksa 
ds vykok½

'kwU;

'ks;jèkkjdksa
 32
0
'kwU;
 38
 0
'kwU;

 2879
 0
'kwU;

 1130195*
32351

mu f'kdk;rksa dks 
NksM+dj ftudk 
lekèkku çkfIr ds 
Vh$1 fnu ds Hkhrj 
dj fn;k x;k FkkA

  1355037*
 23185

Ø- 
la-
egRoiw.kZ leL;k 
ftldh
igpku dh xbZ

bafxr djsa fd 
D;k tksf[ke 
gS ;k volj 
¼vkj@vks½

tksf[ke@volj dh igpku djus  
dk rdZ
tksf[ke ds ekeys esa] 
vuqdwyu ;k de djus dk 
–f"Vdks.k

1
HkkSfrd tksf[ke& yw] 
pØokr vkSj ck<+ dh 
xaHkhjrk esa o`f)
vkj

udkjkRed

vkj

udkjkRed

----

**VII. 	 Transparency and Disclosures Compliances**

**25. Complaints/Grievances on any of the principles (Principles 1 to 9) under the National Guidelines on Responsible Business Conduct**

**Stakeholder group 
from whom complaint 
is received**

**Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism in Place  
(Yes/No)**

**(If Yes, then provide web-
link for grievance redress 
policy)**

**FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23**

**Number of 
complaints 
filed
during the 
year**

**Number of 
complaints 
pending
resolution
at close of 
the year**

**Remarks**

**Number of 
complaints 
filed
during the 
year**

**Number of 
complaints 
pending
resolution
at close of 
the year**

**Remarks**

Communities 
NIL

Investors (other than 
shareholders) 

Yes, the details are given in 
Investor Corner at Bank’s 
corporate website, 
https://www.pnbindia.in/
basic-information.html

NIL

Shareholders 
 32
0
 Nil
 38
 0
Nil

Employees and 
workers 
Yes-Internal
“PNB Samadhaan “
through HRMS (complaints 
related to HR matters) 
available at internet

 2368
 29

Pending complaints 
are lying within 
Turnaround Time 
(TAT).

 2879
 0
Nil

Customers 
Yes, Policy is placed at the 
Corporate Website www.
pnbindia.in, under Tab 
‘Customer Care – Policies’.
 1130195*
32351

Excluding complaints 
which were resolved 
within T+1 days of 
its receipt.

  1355037*
 23185

Excluding 
complaints which 
were resolved 
within T+1 days of 
its receipt.

Value Chain Partners 
Not Applicable

Other (please specify)  
NIL

* For FY 2023-24, number of complaints received from CGRMS portal and CRM portal are 104520 and 1025675 respectively. Similarly, for FY 2022-23, number of 
complaints received from CGRMS portal and CRM portal are 123141 and 1231896 respectively.

**26. Overview of the entity’s material responsible business conduct issues**

**Please indicate material responsible business conduct and sustainability issues pertaining to environmental and social matters that 
present a risk or an opportunity to your business, rationale for identifying the same, approach to adapt or mitigate the risk along-with 
its financial implications, as per the following format**

**S. 
No.
Material issue  
identified
Indicate 
whether**

**risk or**

**opportunity**

**(R/O)**

**Rationale for identifying  
the risk / opportunity
In case of risk, approach to adapt**

**or mitigate
Financial implications of**

**the risk or opportunity**

**(Indicate positive or**

**negative implications)**

1
Physical Risk- Increased 
Severity of heatwaves, 
cyclones and floods
R

Increased indirect (operating) 
costs, Devaluation of collateral
Assessing portfolio and account 
level exposure and following a 
geography 
specific 
approach. 
Diversification 
efforts 
and 
possibility to reduce exposure.
Negative

2
Transition Risk- Carbon 
Pricing mechanism, 
Enhanced emissions-
reporting obligations, 
Substitution of existing 
products and services 
with lower emissions 
options

R

Increased credit risk, potential for 
stranded, illiquid assets
Segmented strategy for different 
sectors 
will 
be 
followed 
for 
mitigation
1. 	 Promote Green sectors
2.	 Cautious approach for Brown 
sectors
3.	 Push towards efficiency in Hard 
to Abate sectors

Negative

----

Ø- 
la-
egRoiw.kZ leL;k 
ftldh
igpku dh xbZ

bafxr djsa fd 
D;k tksf[ke 
gS ;k volj 
¼vkj@vks½

tksf[ke@volj dh igpku djus  
dk rdZ
tksf[ke ds ekeys esa] 
vuqdwyu ;k de djus dk 
–f"Vdks.k

3
fMftVy uokpkj@
ifjorZu

vks

ykxw ugha
ldkjkRed

4
lwpuk ,oa lkbcj lqj{kk 
tksf[ke
vkj

udkjkRed

vks

6
foÙkh; lekos'ku

vks

ykxw ugha
ldkjkRed

8
ifjlaifÙk xq.koÙkk esa 
lqèkkj

vks

ykxw ugha
ldkjkRed

9
c<+h gqÃ ikjnÆ'krk vkSj 
çdVhdj.k
vks

ykxw ugha
ldkjkRed

10
ekuo lalkèku ifjorZu

vks

ykxw ugha
ldkjkRed

----

**S. 
No.
Material issue  
identified
Indicate 
whether**

**risk or**

**opportunity**

**(R/O)**

**Rationale for identifying  
the risk / opportunity
In case of risk, approach to adapt**

**or mitigate
Financial implications of**

**the risk or opportunity**

**(Indicate positive or**

**negative implications)**

3
Digital 
innovations/
transformation

O

The Bank consistently aims to 
develop digital innovations with 
robust features and functionalities 
for its customers. Its digital 
platforms have undergone a 
transformation in last two years 
to offer a seamless banking 
experience for its customers

NA
Positive

4
Information & Cyber 
Security Risk
R

Data and/ or security breaches 
could cause customer dis-trust, 
reputational damage, direct 
material loss, regulatory penalties

Ongoing improvements in IT Risk 
Management, IS and Cybersecurity 
Risk Management. Robust 
governance and organization.

Negative

5
Financing to green, social 
and sustainability linked 
activities/ projects
O

More market share in the 
emerging sustainability related 
financing, environment friendly 
brand recognition

NA
Positive

6
Financial 
Inclusion

O

Bank actively participates in the 
Government's efforts to foster 
financial inclusion. The bank has 
the potential to leverage its vast 
networks/touchpoint to promote 
financial inclusion thus generating 
positive impact on society

NA
Positive

7
Customer Service

O

Potential to improve products 
and services based on customer 
feedback, increasing market share, 
customer retention

NA
Positive

8
Improving Asset Quality

O

Continuously, improving asset 
quality due to negative net 
slippage and better underwriting 
standard.
Contributes directly to the 
Bank's financial performance by 
minimizing credit losses, improving 
profitability, and capital base.

NA
Positive

9
Enhanced 
Transparency and 
disclosures
O

Enhances investor trust, ensures 
adherence to regulatory 
requirements, and bolsters market 
positioning and relationships with 
stakeholders

NA
Positive

10
Human Resource 
Transformation

O

The Bank launched an ambitious 
Human Resource Transformation 
project, ‘UDAAN’, under which 
Leadership Development Programs 
(LDP), digitalisation of HR journeys 
and processes, capacity building 
etc has been started thus creating 
the enhancing the employee 
satisfaction.

NA
Positive

----

çdVhdj.k ç'u
ih
1
ih
2
ih
3
ih
4
ih
5
ih
6
ih
7
ih
8
ih
9

uhfr vkSj çcaèku çfØ;k,¡

3- 	D;k lwphc) uhfr;ka vkids ewY; J`a[kyk Hkkxhnkjksa ij Hkh ykxw gksrh gSa\ ¼gka@ugha½  
ugha

Bank has Information Security Management 
System Certification: ISO / IEC 27001: 2013

vfHk'kklu] usr`Ro vkSj i;Zos{k.k 

----

**SECTION B: MANAGEMENT AND PROCESS DISCLOSURES**

This section is aimed at helping businesses demonstrate the structures, policies and processes put in place towards adopting the NGRBC 
Principles and Core Elements. 

**S No.
Principle Description**

P1
Businesses should conduct and govern themselves with integrity, and in a manner that is Ethical, Transparent and Accountable.

P2
Businesses should provide goods and services in a manner that is sustainable and safe.

P3
Businesses should respect and promote the well-being of all employees, including those in their value chains.

P4
Businesses should respect the interests of and be responsive to all its stakeholders.

P5
Businesses should respect and promote human rights.

P6
Businesses should respect and make efforts to protect and restore the environment.

P7
Businesses, when engaging in influencing public and regulatory policy, should do so in a manner that is responsible and transparent.

P8
Businesses should promote inclusive growth and equitable development.

P9
Businesses should engage with and provide value to their consumers in a responsible manner.

**Disclosure Questions
P
1
P
2
P
3
P
4
P
5
P
6
P
7
P
8
P
9**

**Policy and management processes**

1. 	 a.	 Whether your entity’s policy/policies cover each principle and  

	
its core elements of the NGRBCs. (Yes/No)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

      b. 	 Has the policy been approved by the Board? (Yes/No)  
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

      c.	 Web Link of the Policies, if available  
The policies are available on the Bank’s website 
www.pnbindia.in. 
However, 
some 
policies 
are internal policies and available to internal 
stakeholders only.

2.  Whether the entity has translated the policy into procedures. (Yes / No)  
Yes, the policies have been translated into 
procedures.

3.   Do the enlisted policies extend to your value chain partners? (Yes/No)  
 NA

4.	 Name of the national and international codes/certifications/labels/ standards  
(e.g. Forest Stewardship Council, Fairtrade, Rainforest Alliance, Trustee) standards  
(e.g. SA 8000, OHSAS, ISO, BIS) adopted by your entity and mapped to each principle.  

Bank has Information Security Management 
System Certification: ISO / IEC 27001: 2013

 5.	 Specific commitments, goals and targets set by the entity with defined timelines, if any. No specific target is being set under the policies.

6.	 Performance of the entity against the specific commitments, goals and targets along-
with reasons in case the same are not met. 
The Bank has separate departments that monitors 
the commitments, goals and targets of the 
policy. The Board also reviews the performance 
periodically from time to time.

**Governance, leadership and oversight**

7. 	 Statement by director responsible for the business responsibility report, highlighting ESG related challenges, targets and achievements 
(listed entity has flexibility regarding the placement of this disclosure).

At a global scale, there exists significant emphasis on the adoption of ESG practices due to their profound impact on the planet, society 
and long term value creation. India, during the 26th session of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 26) 
announced its commitment to achieving net zero emissions by 2070. In line with this our bank remains steadfast in its dedication to 
drive sustainable business growth, positioning itself as a provider of responsible and sustainable finance. Recognizing sustainability as a 
cornerstone of long term success, the bank is actively embracing ESG practices by integrating sustainability into all facets of its operations 
aiming to harmonize the interests of all its stakeholders in a sustainable manner.

	
The bank’s adherence to business responsibility and sustainability as evident through this report, underscores its ongoing endeavors to 
infuse sustainability in its operational framework, catalyzing positive change for our Bank, its stakeholders, and society at large. We are 
implementing strategies pertaining to green financing and promoting financial inclusion to uplift underserved communities. 

----

10- daiuh }kjk ,uthvkjchlh dh leh{kk dk fooj.k%

ugha
ugha
ugha
ugha
ugha
ugha
ugha
ugha
ugha

**ykxw ugha**

----

	
On environmental front our Bank has undertaken various initiatives to ensure that our operations are geared towards a sustainable and 
green future. With focus on embracing sustainability, we have adopted various energy and resource conservation measures including 
paper reduction and streamlining digital processes. Additionally, we have commissioned solar energy plants at various Bank’s buildings 
and installed Electric Vehicle Charging stations at our Head Office building. Rain Water Harvesting (RWH) systems have been installed in 
the majority of our owned buildings to conserve rain water for future usage. Furthermore, all upcoming and under-construction buildings 
have been extensively planned to maximize the collection of rainwater run-off. In our lending practices, we prioritize sectors like renewable 
energy, solar power, etc. Moreover, to manage climate risk, the bank has taken many initiatives, some of which are: a) Approach paper 
to address climate risk –Implementation Plan, b) Financing Framework for Green, Social and Sustainability Linked Activities/ Projects; c) 
Framework for Green House Gas emission (GHG) measurement, d) Conducted Climate Risk Stress Testing for Physical Risk etc. 

Giving back to society has been the purpose, and the Bank is at the forefront of supporting underprivileged sections of society through our 
various CSR activities and rural training centers. Along with this, the Bank remains unwavering in its commitment to foster diversity, equity, 
and inclusion within its workplace. Apart from already existing diversity in work place, the Bank has formulated “Gender Diversity Policy” 
wherein women centric measures are adopted.

Moreover, Bank is dedicated to enhancing governance practices by upholding high levels of ethical standards, ensuring transparency, 
fostering accountability, and complying with regulatory requirements. The Bank has well defined policies and standard operating procedures 
such as Cyber Security Policy, Whistle Blower Policy, Customer Rights Policy etc.

Looking ahead, the bank is focused on improving integration of business model and ESG measures into its operations, thus reinforcing 
commitment to sustainable growth.

8. 	 Details of the highest authority responsible for implementation and oversight of the Business 
Responsibility policy (ies). 
Shri Binod Kumar 
Executive Director

9. 	 Does the entity have a specified Committee of the Board/ Director responsible for decision making 
on sustainability related issues? (Yes / No). If yes, provide details. 
Sustainability 
and 
Resilience 
Committee (SARC) headed by MD & 
CEO has been formed for governance 
of sustainability related activities.

Further, Risk Management Committee 
(sub-committee of Board) has been 
assigned sustainability related roles 
and responsibilities. 

10. Details of Review of NGRBCs by the Company:  

**Subject for Review
Indicate whether review was undertaken by Director**

**/ Committee of the Board/
Any other Committee**

**Frequency (Annually/ Half yearly/
Quarterly/ Any other – please specify)**

Performance against above 
policies and 
follow up action 

**P
1
P
2
P
3
P
4
P
5
P
6
P
7
P
8
P
9
P
1
P
2
P
3
P
4
P
5
P
6
P
7
P
8
P
9**

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Annually, or as and when required,
The competent authorities review the policies 
annually or as and when required. The necessary 
changes in the policy are implemented post 
review. 

Compliance with statutory 
requirements of relevance to the 
principles, and, rectification of 
any non-compliances 

Policies of the bank are placed to Board/Competent Authority for approval. Also, the Bank is in compliance 
with the extant regulations as applicable.

Secretarial Audit Report is signed by Practicing Company Secretary appointed by the bank for the said 
purpose and it is published in annual report and filed in the stock exchange,

11. Has the entity carried out independent assessment/ evaluation of the working of its 
policies by an external agency? (Yes/No). If yes, provide name of the agency. 
P
1
P
2
P
3
P
4
P
5
P
6
P
7
P
8
P
9

**N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N**

**12.  If answer to question (1) above is “No” i.e. not all Principles are covered by a policy, reasons to be stated:**

	
Not Applicable

----

**[kaM lh% fl)karokj dk;Zfu"iknu çdVhdj.k**

**vko';d ladsrd**

[kaM
vk;ksftr çf'k{k.k vkSj 
tkx:drk dk;ZØeksa dh dqy 
la[;k

Jfed
ykxw ugha

ekSfæd
,uthvkjchlh 
fl)kar
fu;ked@ 
çorZu ,tsafl;ksa@ 
U;kf;d laLFkkvksa 
dk uke

'kwU;

le>kSrk
ykxw ugha

pØo`f) 'kqYd
ykxw ugha

xSj&ekSfæd

----

**SECTION C: PRINCIPLE WISE PERFORMANCE DISCLOSURE**

This section is aimed at helping entities demonstrate their performance in integrating the Principles and Core Elements with key processes and 
decisions. The information sought is categorized as “Essential” and “Leadership”. While the essential indicators are expected to be disclosed by 
every entity that is mandated to file this report, the leadership indicators may be voluntarily disclosed by entities which aspire to progress to a 
higher level in their quest to be socially, environmentally and ethically responsible.  

**PRINCIPLE 1 Businesses should conduct and govern themselves with integrity, and in a manner that is Ethical, Transparent and 
Accountable.**

**ESSENTIAL INDICATORS**

**1. 
Percentage coverage by training and awareness programmes on any of the Principles during the financial year:**

**Segment
Total number of training and
awareness programmes held
Topics /principles
covered under the training and**

**its impact**

**%age of persons in respective**

**category covered by the 
awareness programmes**

Board of Directors
11
All
100.00%

Key Managerial Personnel 
4
All
100.00%

Employees other than BoD and KMPs 
1502
All
74.39%

Workers
NA

**2. 
Details of fines / penalties /punishment/ award/ compounding fees/ settlement amount paid in proceedings (by the entity or by 
directors / KMPs) with regulators/ law enforcement agencies/ judicial institutions, in the financial year, in the following format**

**(Note: the entity shall make disclosures on the basis of materiality as specified in Regulation 30 of SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure 
Obligations) Regulations, 2015 and as disclosed on the entity’s website):**

**Monetary**

**Details
NGRBC 
Principle
Name of the**

**regulatory/**

**enforcement agencies/**

**judicial institutions**

**Amount**

**(In INR)
Brief of the Case
Has an 
appeal been**

**preferred?**

**(Yes/No)**

Penalty/ Fine
-
The Reserve Bank of 
India
Rs. 72 
lakhs
The Reserve Bank of India
In exercise of powers conferred under section 47A (1)
(c) read with sections 46(4)(i) and 51 (1) of the Banking 
Regulation Act 1949, RBI vide speaking order dated 30 
October 2023 imposed, a penalty of ₹72 Lakh (Rupees 
Seventy-Two Lakh) on Bank for non-compliance with 
certain provisions of 'Reserve Bank of India (Interest 
Rate on Deposits) Directions, 2016', 'Reserve Bank of 
India (Interest Rate on Advances) Directions, 2016' and 
'Master Circular on Customer Service in Banks'

Nil

Settlement
NA

Compounding fee
NA

**Non-Monetary**

Imprisonment
Nil
In terms of the Bank’s Policy for determining materiality of events to be Reported 
to Stock Exchanges, no such instance has been reported to the Stock Exchanges 
during FY 2023-24.
Punishment
Nil

----

**3. 
Of the instances disclosed in Question 2 above, details of 
the Appeal/ Revision preferred in cases where monetary or 
non-monetary action has been appealed.**

**Case Details
Name of the regulatory/ enforcement 
agencies/ judicial institutions**

NIL

**4. 
Does the entity have an anti-corruption or anti-bribery policy? 
If yes, provide details in brief and if available, provide a web-
link to the policy.**

	
The Bank has a Whistle Blower Policy to check unethical practices, 
corruption, malpractices, embezzlements, and misappropriation 
of funds through preventive vigilance measures. It is committed 
to enhance investor and other stakeholders’ confidence and set 
high standards of transparency, ethical values for improving 
efficiency and growth of the organization. The objective of 
having the policy in place is to ensure practices based on 
transparency, accountability and protect the interest of the 
bank and adhere to the statutory and regulatory requirements. 
The policy is present on the website https://www.pnbindia.in/
whistle-blower-policy.html. Besides this bank also have various 
other channel through which customers can report instances of 
corruption and bribery like bank’s on-line grievance redressal 
portal called Centralized Grievance Redressal Monitoring 
System (CGRMS), contact centers, email at care@pnb.co.in.

**5. 
Number 
of 
Directors/KMPs/employees/workers 
against**

whom disciplinary action was taken by any law enforcement 
agency for the charges of bribery/ corruption: 

**particulars
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23**

Directors 
NIL
NIL 

KMPs 
NIL
NIL

Employees
NIL
NIL

Workers
NIL
NIL

**6. 
Details of complaints with regard to conflict of interest:**

**Details
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23**

**No.
Remarks
No.
Remarks**

No. of complaints 
received in relation 
to issues of Conflict 
of Interest of the 
Directors  3.

Nil
Not 
Applicable
Nil
Not 
Applicable

No. of complaints 
received in relation to 
issues of Conflict of 
Interest of the KMPs

Nil
Not 
Applicable
Nil
Not 
Applicable

**ekeys dk fooj.k
fu;ked@çorZu ,tsafl;k¡@U;kf;d laLFkkvksa 
dk uke
'kwU;**

**6-	 fgrksa ds Vdjko ls lacafèkr f'kdk;rksa dk fooj.k%**

**foÙk o"kZ 2023-24
foÙk o"kZ 2022-23**

**la[;k
fVIi.kh
la[;k
fVIi.kh**

**funs'kdksa ds fgrksa ds 
Vdjko ds eqíksa ds lacaèk 
esa çkIr f'kdk;rksa dh 
la[;k**

**'kwU;
ykxw ugha
'kwU;
ykxw ugha**

**'kwU;
ykxw ugha
'kwU;
ykxw ugha**

----

**7. 
Provide details of any corrective action taken or underway on 
issues related to fines / penalties / action taken by regulators/ 
law enforcement agencies/ judicial institutions, on cases of 
corruption and conflicts of interest.**

	
Not Applicable 

**8. 
Number of days of accounts payables (Accounts payable *365) 
/ (Cost of goods/services procured) in the following format:**

**FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23**

Number of days of 
accounts payables
39 Days
42 Days

**9. 
Open-ness of business**

Provide details of concentration of purchases and sales with 
trading houses, dealers, and related parties along-with loans 
and advances & investments, with related parties, in the 
following format:

Parameter
Metric
FY 
2023-24
FY 
2022-23
Concentration 
of Purchases
a.	 Purchases from trading 
houses as % of total 
purchases

Not 
Material
Not 
Material

b.	 Number of trading 
houses where purchases 
are made from

Not 
Material
Not 
Material

c.	 Purchases from top 10 
trading houses as % of 
total purchases from 
trading houses

Not 
Material
Not 
Material

Concentration 
of Sales
a.	 Sales to dealers / 
distributors as % of total 
sales

Not 
Material
Not 
Material

b.	 Number of dealers / 
distributors to whom 
sales are made

Not 
Material
Not 
Material

c.	 Sales to top 10 dealers 
/ distributors as % of 
total sales to dealers / 
distributors

Not 
Material
Not 
Material

Share of  
RPTs in
a.	 Purchases (Purchases 
with related parties / 
Total Purchases)

0.00%
0.00%

b.	 Sales (Sales to related 
parties / Total Sales)*
1.21%
0.96%

c.	 Loans & advances (Loans 
& advances given to 
related parties / Total 
loans & advances)

0.96%
0.77%

d.	 Investments ( Invest-
ments in related parties 
/ Total Investments 
made)

0.18%
0.19%

*Including interest and other charges received on assignments of loan, rent 
received, commission, dividend received, etc.

**ykxw ugha**

**foÙk o"kZ 2023-24
foÙk o"kZ 2022-23
ns; [kkrksa ds fnuksa dh 
la[;k 
39 fnu
42 fnu**

lh.	O;kikfjd ?kjkuksa ls dqy 
[kjhn ds % ds :i esa 
'kh"kZ 10 O;kikfjd ?kjkuksa ls 
[kjhnkjh

**egRoiw.kZ 
ugha 
egRoiw.kZ 
ugha**

**egRoiw.kZ 
ugha 
egRoiw.kZ 
ugha**

**ch-	Mhyjksa@forjd dh la[;k 
ftudks fcØh dh tkrh gS
egRoiw.kZ 
ugha 
egRoiw.kZ 
ugha**

lh-	Mhyjksa@forjdksa dks dh xbZ 
dqy fcØh ds % ds :i esa 
'kh"kZ 10 Mhyjksa@forjdksa dks 
fcØh

**egRoiw.kZ 
ugha 
egRoiw.kZ 
ugha**

**vkjihVh 
dk 
fgLlk**

**,-	[kjhn ¼lacafèkr i{kksa ds lkFk 
[kjhn@dqy [kjhn½**

0.00%
0.00%

ch-	fcØh ¼lacafèkr i{kksa dks fcØh@
dqy fcØh½*

1.21%
0.96%

**lh-	_.k ,oa vfxze ¼lacafèkr 
i{kksa dks fn, x, _.k ,oa 
vfxze@dqy _.k ,oa vfxze½**

0.96%
0.77%

**Mh-	fuos'k ¼lacafèkr i{kksa esa 
fuos'k@dqy 
fd;k 
x;k 
fuos'k½**

0.18%
0.19%

----

**LEADERSHIP INDICATORS**

**1. 
Awareness programs conducted for value chain partners on 
any of the Principles during the financial year:**

**Total no. of 
awareness**

**programmes**

**held**

**Topics /**

**principles 
covered under**

**the training**

**%age of value chain partners**

**covered (by value of business**

**done with such partners) under**

**the awareness programmes**

No  such awareness programme held for value chain partners.

**2. 
Does the entity have processes in place to avoid/ manage 
conflict of interests involving members of the Board? (Yes/No) 
If yes, provide details of the same.**

	
Yes, Processes to avoid / manage conflicts of interests involving 
members of the Board are included in the Model Code of 
Conduct for all members of the Board. Confirmation with regard 
to adherence to the Model Code of Conduct is obtained from 
the Directors at the time of joining and thereafter, on annual 
basis. The auditor’s certificate on corporate governance in the 
Integrated Annual Report reflects the Bank’s commitment to 
ensuring management accountability and upholding corporate 
ethics, value and sustainability. The bank publishes corporate 
governance reports quarterly and ensures Model Code of 
Conduct is followed by all board members.

**PRINCIPLE 2 Businesses should provide goods and services in 
a manner that is sustainable and safe**

**1. 
Percentage of Research and Development and capital 
expenditure (capex) investments in specific technologies to 
improve the environmental and social impacts of product and 
processes to total R&D and capex investments made by the 
entity, respectively.**

**Details
FY 
2023-24
FY 
2022-23
Details of improvements in**

**environmental and social impacts**

R&D
NIL

Capex
26.21 
lacs
-
Electrical 
Vehicle 
Charging 
infrastructure has been set up at 
HO Dwarka building. It includes 
2 no. of 60 KW Dual Gun DC Fast 
Charger and 3 nos. of 7.5 KW Type 
2 AC Charger. Total cost: ₹26.21 
lacs

**2. 
a. Does the entity have procedures in place for sustainable**

**sourcing? (Yes/No)**

	
	
As the Bank is in the Financial Services sector, material 
purchase for operations is not significant except for 
paper. For other procurement for office, the Bank has 
a Procurement policy wherein sustainability sourcing 
guidelines are mandated, like purchase of minimum 
threshold for star ratings of AC units, minimum standards 
for procurement of energy efficient electrical & electronic 
equipments. 

**usr`Ro ladsrd**

**vk;ksftr 
tkx:drk 
dk;ZØeksa dh 
dqy la[;k**

**çf'k{k.k ds varxZr 
'kkfey  
fo"k;@fl)kar**

**fl)kar 2 dkjksckj dks bl rjhds ls lkeku vkSj lsok,a çnku 
djuk pkfg, tks LFkk;h  vkSj lqjf{kr gks**

----

	
b. If yes, what percentage of inputs were sourced 

sustainably? 

	
	
These inputs are not currently quantified in our reporting as 
the primary functions of the bank include the acceptance 
of deposits and the provision of credit financing. The 
proportion of inputs sourced through sustainable means 
remains minimal in comparison to the bank’s core business 
operations. Nonetheless, the bank sources items as per the 
Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) guidelines.

**3.	
Describe the processes in place to safely reclaim your products 
for reusing, recycling and disposing at the end of life, for 
(a) Plastics (including packaging) (b) E-waste (c) Hazardous 
waste and (d) other waste.**

	
The Bank is working progressively towards sustainable 
management of waste generated from its operations. The Bank 
deals with three types of non-hazardous waste – e-waste, dry 
waste (paper waste) and wet waste (cafeteria, sewage), of which 
e-waste is disposed through authorized recyclers. We have been 
following practices for below mention waste categories. 

(a)  Plastics (including packaging) – The Bank is aggressively 
working towards minimizing the use of plastic bottles. 
Single use plastic bottles are being phased out from 
Head Office and we have replaced multiple use plastic 
water bottles with glass jars across all meeting and video 
conferencing rooms. At our HO we have engaged a vendor 
partner who collects our Wet and Dry waste to Compost/
Recycle it in an eco-friendly manner. 

(b)  E-waste – Our E-waste broadly includes computers, 
servers, scanners, printers, Batteries, etc. All such E-wastes 
are being disposed of in following manner:

•	
Buyback option from Vendor

•	
Disposal of Hardware by way of open auction/tender

•	
Gift/donation to eligible institutions

•	
Disposal through E-Waste Scrap Dealers

(c)  Hazardous waste – Our Bank services do not involve 
producing or disposing hazardous waste of any kind. 
Hence this is not applicable. 

(d)  Other waste – All our offices/branches use 100% 
biodegradable plastic garbage bags to collect and dispose 
it to nearest municipal dustbin for dry and wet waste

4.	
Whether Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) is applicable 
to the entity’s activities (Yes / No). If yes, whether the 
waste collection plan is in line with the Extended Producer 
Responsibility (EPR) plan submitted to Pollution Control 
Boards? If not, provide steps taken to address the same. 

	
The question is Not Applicable for the Bank as the Bank is in 
the service industry and does not produce any goods for the 
customers.

	
•	 foØsrk ls ck;cSd fodYi

	
•	 [kqyh uhykeh@fufonk ds ekè;e ls gkMZos;j dk fuiVku

	
•	 ik= laLFkkvksa dks migkj@nku

----

**LEADERSHIP INDICATORS**

**1. 
Has the entity conducted Life Cycle Perspective / Assessments 
(LCA) for any of its products (for manufacturing industry) or 
for its services (for service industry)? If yes, provide details in 
the following format?**

 NIC 
Code
Name of 

Product /
Service

% of total 

Turnover 

contributed

Boundary for 

which the 

Life Cycle 

Perspective / 

Assessment 

was 

conducted

Whether 
conducted by 

independent 
external 

agency  
(Yes/No)

Results 

communicated 

in public domain 

(Yes/No)  
If yes, provide  
the web-link.

Not Applicable given the nature of industry.

**2. 
If there are any significant social or environmental concerns 
and/or risks arising from production or disposal of your 
products/services, as identified in the Life Cycle Perspective/
Assessments (LCA) or through any other means, briefly describe 
the same along-with action taken to mitigate the same.**

**Name of Product /
Service
Description of the risk**

**/ concern
Action Taken**

Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable

**3. 
Percentage of recycled or reused input material to total 
material (by value) used in production (for manufacturing 
industry) or providing services (for service industry).**

**Indicate input 
material
Recycled or re-used input material to total material**

**FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23**

No such recycled or reused input material used for providing services.

**4. 
Of the products and packaging reclaimed at end of life of 
products, amount (in metric tonnes) reused, recycled, and 
safely disposed, as per the following format:**

Particulars
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23

Re-Used 
Recycled 
Safely 

Disposed 
Re-Used 
Recycled 
Safely 

Disposed 

Plastics 
(including 
packaging) 

Plastic waste generated from our office premises are minimal as the 
majority of the plastics used in our office premises including plastic 
bags are biodegradable in nature and same are being disposed to 
nearest municipal dustbins. The amount of plastic waste generated 
is negligible in terms of metric tonnes, hence it is not relevant to 
our business entity.

E-waste  
Hardware 
disposed 
off 
by 
buy back option amounting 
Rs.93,18,160.  Also 10 tonnes of 
e-waste like  servers, monitor, 
CPU/All in one & Printer were 
disposed off by e-waste scrap 
dealer (Amount Rs.10,33,798)

Hardware 
disposed 
off 
by 
buy back option amounting 
Rs.51,95,870.

Hazardous 
waste 
As the Bank is in the Financial Services sector, Bank services do not 
involve producing or disposing hazardous waste of any kind. Hence 
this is not applicable in our case. 

Other 
waste  
Dry and wet waste 
at HO level
25.50 MT
Data not available.

**5. 
Reclaimed products and their packaging materials (as 
percentage of products sold) for each product category.**

**Indicate product**

**category
Reclaimed products and their packaging materials**

**as % of total products sold in respective category**

Not Applicable

,u 
vkbZ 
lh 
dksM

mRikn@lsok 
dk uke
dqy dkjksckj 
dk % 
;ksxnku

og lhek ftlds 
fy, thou 
pØ ifjçs{; 
@ ewY;kadu 
vk;ksftr fd;k 
x;k Fkk

D;k Lora= 
cká ,tsalh  
}kjk lapkfyr 
fd;k x;k gS 
¼gka@ugha½

mRikn dk uke@lsok
tksf[ke@fpark dk fooj.k
dh xbZ dkjZokbZ

ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha

fooj.k
foÙk o"kZ  2023-24
foÙk o"kZ 2022-23
iqu% 
mi;ksx 
fd,

jhlkbdy
lqjf{kr :i 
ls fuiVk, 
x,

iqu% 
mi;ksx 
fd,

jhlkbdy
lqjf{kr :i 
ls fuiVk, 
x,
IykfLVd 
¼iSdsftax 
lfgr½

ykxw ugh

----

**PRINCIPLE 3 Businesses should respect and promote the well-
being of all employees, including those in their value chains**

**ESSENTIAL INDICATORS**

**1.     a.   Details of measures for the well-being of employees:**

Category

Total (A)

% of employees covered by
Day Care 

facilities
Health 
insurance
Accident 
insurance
Maternity 

benefits
Paternity
Benefits

Number
(B)
% 

(B /
A)

Number
(C)
% 

(C /
A)

Number
(D)
% 

(D /
A)

Number
(E)
% 

(E /
A)

Number
(F)
% 

(E /
A)

Permanent employees

Male  
77359
77359 100
77359 100
0
0
77359 100
15 0.02%

Female  24990
24990 100
24990 100
24990 100
0
0
63 0.25%

Total  
102349 102349 100 102349 100
24990 100
77359 100
78 0.08%

Other than Permanent employees

Male  
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

Female  
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

Total  
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

**b.  
Details of measures for the well-being of workers:**

Category

Total (A)

% of workers covered by
Day Care 

facilities
Health 
insurance
Accident 
insurance
Maternity 

benefits
Paternity
Benefits

Number
(B)
% 

(B /
A)

Number
(C)
% 

(C /
A)

Number
(D)
% 

(D /
A)

Number
(E)
% 

(E /
A)

Number
(F)
% (E /
A)

Permanent workers 

Male  
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

Female  
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

Total  
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

Other than Permanent workers 

Male  
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

Female  
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

Total  
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

**c.  
Spending on measures towards well-being of employees and 
workers (including permanent and other than permanent) in the 
following format**

FY 2023-24 
Current Financial Year
FY 2022-23 
Previous Financial Year

Cost incurred on 
wellbeing measures as 
a % of total revenue of 
the company 

0.47%
0.50%

**oxZ**

**dqy ¼,½**

la[;k 
¼ch½
% 

¼ch 
@,½

la[;k 
¼lh½
% 

¼lh 
@,½

la[;k 
¼Mh½
% 

¼Mh 
@,½

la[;k 
¼b½
% 
¼b 
@,½

la[;k 
¼,Q½
% 

¼,Q 
@,½
LFkk;h deZpkjh
iq#"k
77359
77359
100
77359
100
0
0 77359
100
15 0.02%

efgyk
24990
24990
100
24990
100 24990
100
0
0
63 0.25%

dqy
102349 102349
100 102349
100 24990
100 77359
100
78 0.08%

**LFkk;h deZpkfj;ksa ds vykok**

**iq#"k
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha**

**efgyk
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha**

**dqy
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha**

**ch- 	dkexkjksa ds dY;k.k gsrq fd, x, mik;ksa dk fooj.k%**

**oxZ**

**dqy ¼,½**

la[;k 
¼ch½
% 

¼ch 
@,½

la[;k 
¼lh½
% 

¼lh 
@,½

la[;k 
¼Mh½
% 

¼Mh 
@,½

la[;k 
¼b½
% 
¼b 
@,½

la[;k 
¼,Q½
% 

¼,Q 
@,½
LFkk;h deZpkjh

**iq#"k
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha**

**efgyk
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha**

**dqy
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
LFkk;h deZpkfj;ksa ds vykok**

**iq#"k
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha**

**efgyk
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha**

**dqy
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw 
ugha**

0.47%
0.50%

----

ykHk

dqy dkexkjksa ds 
% ds :i esa	
doj fd, x, 
dkexkjksa dh la[;k

la[;k % ds :i 
esa doj fd, x, 
deZpkjh dqy 
deZpkjh

la[;k dqy 
Jfedksa ds çfr'kr 
ds :i esa doj 
fd, x, Jfed

3-	 dk;ZLFkyksa rd igqap

fyax
LFkk;h deZpkjh
LFkk;h dkexkjksa

dke ij okilh nj
çfrèkkj.k nj*
dke ij okilh nj
çfrèkkj.k nj

iq#"k
 100.00%
 99.93%
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha

efgyk
 100.00%
 99.39%
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha

dqy
 100.00%
 99.75%
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha

----

**2. 
Details of retirement benefits, for Current FY and Previous Financial Year.**

**Benefits**

**FY 2023-24 
Current Financial Year**

**FY 2022-23
Previous Financial Year**

**No. of employees 
covered as a % of**

**total employees**

**No. of workers**

**covered as a % of**

**total workers**

**Deducted and**

**deposited with**

**the authority**

**(Y/N/N.A.)**

**No. of  employees**

**covered as a % of**

**total employees**

**No. of  workers**

**covered as a % of**

**total workers**

**Deducted and**

**deposited with**

**the authority**

**(Y/N/N.A.)**

PF 
0.20%
NA
Y*
0.23%
NA
Y *

Gratuity 
100.00%
NA
NA
100.00%
NA
NA

ESI 
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

Others – Pension 
21.92%
NA
Y*
24.43%
NA
Y *

Others – NPS
77.88%
NA
Y
75.34%
NA
Y

* Deducted and deposited in Bank`s own PF and Pension Trust

**3. 
Accessibility of workplaces**

**Are the premises / offices of the entity accessible to differently abled employees and workers, as per the requirements of the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016? If not, whether any steps are being taken by the entity in this regard.**

**The Bank is continuously making efforts that all its offices/branches are accessible without any inconvenience to Divynagjans (both 
employees and customers), by ensuring ramp facility and disabled friendly amenities. This is taken care while construction of the bank’s 
own buildings & during hiring of premises on lease basis. The efforts are made to provide permanent ramp, however, in cases where the 
permanent ramp is not available in leased premises, temporary ramp facilities are provided. The guidelines for providing barrier free 
environment for “Divyangjans” are incorporated in the Policy for Hiring Lease Premises by Bank. The compliance also reported to DFS, GOI 
in this regard on regular basis. Further, Bank also provides doorstep delivery of financial services to Divyangjans through doorstep banking.**

**At present, Bank’s 11249 ATMs out of total 12131 ATMs (i.e. 92.73% ATMs) and Bank’s 8355 branches out of total 10136 branches  
(i.e. 82.43% Branches) have ramp facilities. For, the remaining branches (17.57%) and ATMs (7.27%) it is impractical to provide ramp facility, 
where notice have been displayed in compliance of RBI guidelines.**

**4. 
Does the entity have an equal opportunity policy as per the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016? If so, provide a web-link to the policy.**

**Yes, the Bank has a Customer Rights policy which gives equal opportunity to disabled persons. The policy is available on the Bank’s website 
www.pnbindia.in.**

**The Diversity Policy of the Bank is applicable to all differently abled employees and the Bank creates employment opportunities and provide 
them with a conducive work environment. The wages/salaries, promotions and other benefits extended to employees with disabilities are 
at par with other employees. Proper care is taken at the time of assigning duties to employees with disabilities so that they are able to 
discharge their duties easily, in spite of their disability. Various benefits/perquisites are available to staff members with disabilities such as 
provision of special computer software for visually impaired employees, exemption from rural/semi-urban postings, convenient place of 
posting etc.**

**5. 
Return to work and Retention rates of permanent employees and workers that took parental leave.**

**Gender
Permanent employees
Permanent workers**

**Return to work rate
Retention rate*
Return to work rate
Retention rate**

**Male
 100.00%
 99.93%
NA
NA**

**Female
 100.00%
 99.39%
NA
NA**

**Total
 100.00%
 99.75%
NA
NA**

*Considering those employees whose maternity/Paternity leave ended in FY 2022-23 and Left the Bank (Because of any reason) in FY 2023-24

----

**6. 
Is there a mechanism available to receive and redress 
grievances for the following categories of employees and 
worker? If yes, give details of the mechanism in brief.**

**Particulars
Yes/No  
(If Yes, then give details of the mechanism in brief)**

**Permanent 
Workers  
N.A.**

**Other than 
Permanent 
Workers**

**N.A.**

**Permanent 
Employees 
Yes,
Bank has “PNB Samadhaan” a formal platform for 
redressal of various grievances/ problems faced by 
the employees of the Bank, for which a functionality 
has been provided in HRMS for all the employees to 
enable them to lodge their grievances/ complaints 
online through HRMS.**

**PNB SAMADHAAN covers all work related and 
personal problems faced by serving staff members. 
Other matters may be considered if the employees 
feel there is violation of rules or that there is a clear 
cut case of injustice or victimization.**

**Other than 
Permanent 
Employees**

**N.A.**

**7. 
Membership of employees and worker in association(s) or 
Unions recognised by the listed entity:**

Category

FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23

Total 
employees/ 

workers in 
respective 

category
(A)

No. of 
employees 

/ workers in 

respective 

category, who 

are part of 
association(s) 

or Union
(B)

%(B/A)
Total 
employees 

/ workers in 

respective 

category
(C )

No. of 
employees 

/ workers in 

respective 

category, who 

are part of 
association(s)  
or Union
(D)

%(D/C)

Total 
Permanent 
Employees
102349
100595
98.29%
104120
100075
96.12%

Male
77359
76049
98.31%
79054
75887
95.99%

Female
24990
24546
98.22%
25066
24188
96.50%

Total 
Permanent 
Workers
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

Male
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

Female
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

**fooj.k
gka ugh  
¼;fn gka] rks la{ksi esa ra= dk fooj.k nsa½**

**LFkk;h deZpkjh
ykxw ugha**

**LFkk;h dkexkjksa  
ds vykok
ykxw ugha**

**LFkk;h deZpkfj;ksa 
ds vykok
ykxw ugha**

oxZ

%
¼ch 
@,½

lacafèkr 
Js.kh esa dqy 
deZpkjh@ 
dkexkj 
¼lh½

%
¼Mh@
lh½

dqy LFkk;h 
deZpkjh
102349
100595
98.29%
104120
100075
96.12%

iq#"k
77359
76049
98.31%
79054
75887
95.99%

efgyk
24990
24546
98.22%
25066
24188
96.50%

**dqy 
LFkk;h 
dkexkj**

**ykxw  
ugha
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha**

**iq#"k
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha**

**efgyk
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw  
ugha
ykxw 
ugha**

----

**8. 
Details of training given to employees and workers:**

Category

FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23

Total
(A)

On Health 
and safety 

measures

On Skill
upgradation
Total
(D)

On Health and
safety 

measures

On Skill 

upgradation

No.
(B)
% (B
/ A)
No.
(C)
% (C /
A)
No.
(E)
% (E
/ D)
No.
(F)
% (F /
D)

Employees

Male
77359
2043
2.65 56998
73.68
79054
1813
2.29 56810
71.86

Female
24990
799
3.20 17581
70.35
25066
648
2.59 17453
69.63

Total
102349
2842
2.77 74579
72.87 104120
2461
2.36 74263
71.32

*POSH
-
219
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

Total
102349
3061
3.00
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

Workers

Male
NA
Female

Total

*An in-house open webinar (registration was not required) was conducted on Prevention 
of Sexual Harassment which was attended by 219 employees.

**9. 
Details of performance and career development reviews of 
employees and worker:**

**Category
FY 2023-24*
FY 2022-23***

**Total (A)
No.(B)
% (B/A)
Total (C)
No. (D)
% (D/C)**

**Employees**

Male
79054
38166
48.28%
78857
38234
48.49%

Female
25066
12488
49.82%
24287
12263
50.49%

Total
104120
50654
48.65%
103144
50497
48.96%

**Workers**

Male

Not Applicable
Female

Total

*Annual performance appraisal reviews is done on yearly basis for officers 
only. Figures have been regrouped whenever considered necessary as annual 
performance appraisal for FY 2022-23 is being done in FY 2023-24. Similarly, 
annual performance appraisal for FY 2021-22 was done in FY 2022-23.

**10. Health and safety management system:**

**a. 
Whether an occupational health and safety management 
system has been implemented by the entity? (Yes/ No). If 
yes, the coverage such system?**

**Yes, as per standard norms**

**The bank places a high emphasis on its employees’ well-
being and security. Regular inspections and assessments 
are conducted for safety equipment such as fire 
extinguishers, emergency exits, and first aid kits. Each 
branch and office undergoes routine checks to verify that 
electrical and fire safety standards are met, with prompt 
measures implemented as needed. Moreover, the provision 
of group term insurance and health insurance for employees 
offers extra protection against unexpected events.**

**8-	 deZpkfj;ksa ,oa dkexkjksa dks fn, x, çf'k{k.k dk fooj.k%**

**oxZ**

foÙk o"kZ 2023-24
foÙk o"kZ 2022-23

**dqy  
,½**

**LokLF; 
,oa lqj{kk 
mik;ksa ij**

**dkS'ky 
mUu;u ij
dqy 
¼Mh½**

**LokLF; ,oa 
lqj{kk mik;ksa 
ij**

**dkS'ky 
mUu;u ij**

efgyk
24990
799
3.20 17581
70.35
25066
648
2.59 17453
69.63
dqy
102349
2842
2.77 74579
72.87 104120
2461
2.36 74263
71.32

*i‚'k
-
219
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
dqy
102349
3061
3.00
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
dkexkj
iq#"k
ykxw ugha
efgyk
dqy

**gka] ekud ekunaMksa ds vuqlkj**

----

**b. 
What are the processes used to identify work-related 
hazards and assess risks on a routine and non-routine 
basis by the entity?**

Adequate preventive and protective measures are 
essential to be implemented as per physical security & fire 
safety policies and well defined procedures of the bank.

Routine Risk Identification: All the bank’s premises 
are classified in various risk categories according to 
parameters prescribed by Indian Banking Association. 
Further, necessary preventive measures are implemented 
to mitigate the hazards/ risks as per risk categorization. 
Bank has team of security officers and fire officers and 
they conduct regular inspection at the bank’s premises. 
Well defined checklists and formats of inspection/ audits 
are prescribed for regular inspection and audits for 
identify risk/ hazards.

Non-Routine Risk Identification: Necessary preventive 
measures are taken in case of any gaps observed during 
incident investigation, hazards identification during 
issuance/ planning of work permit/ hot work permit, mock 
drills, employee feedback etc. Bank has also put in place 
broad guidelines on actions that can be taken by Bank staff 
during theft, burglarly, dacoity, robbery etc.

**c. 
Whether you have processes for workers to report the 
work related hazards and to remove themselves from 
such risks. (Y/N)**

	
Yes

**d. 
Do the employees/ worker of the entity have access to non-
occupational medical and healthcare services? (Yes/ No)**

	
Yes, all employees of the Bank are covered under the Group 
Insurance policy. Expenses incurred above the sum insured 
are covered under the corporate buffer. The Bank also has a 
New Group Personal Accidental (GPA) Insurance Policy. 

**11. Details of safety related incidents, in the following format:**

Safety Incident/Number
Category
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23

Lost Time Injury Frequency 
Rate (LTIFR) (per one million-
person hours worked)

Employees 
1.48^
0.00

Workers 
NA
NA
Total recordable work- 
related injuries 
Employees 
4.00*
3.00*

Workers 
NA
NA

No. of fatalities  
Employees 
NIL
NIL

Workers 
NA
NA

High consequence work-
related injury or ill-health 
(excluding fatalities) 

Employees 
NIL
NIL

Workers 
NA
NA

^Assuming minimum of 250 working days per annum.
   Work hours have been based on average consumer dealing time in a bank.
*1 Employee availed the leaves of 38 days in 2023-24. No employee availed 
leave in 2022-23.
•	
As the Banking industry is a service industry and no work is being 
done on construction sites, there may be very rare incidents of 
fatalities or injuries that take place while working in the Bank.
•	
Further, the Bank is not required to maintain such data.

**11-	 lqj{kk lacaèkh ?kVukvksa dk fooj.k] fuEufyf[kr çk:i esa%**

deZpkjh
1.48^
0.00
dkexkj
ykxw ugha
ykxw ugha

**•
blds vykok] cSad dks ,sls vkadM+s j[kus dh vko';drk ugha gSA**

----

**12. Describe the measures taken by the entity to ensure a safe and**

**healthy work place.**

	
The bank recognizes safe and healthy workplace is integral to 
its success and growth. The major workplace safety related 
risks include fire safety at premises, Branch, administrative 
buildings and ATM security, security of currency chests and cash 
in transit, electrical safety of premises etc. To ensure safe and 
healthy workplace bank has formulated various policies like fire 
safety policy, physical security policy, etc.

	
The Bank takes measure to ensure safety of workplace by 
installation of Fire safety equipment and CCTV surveillance. The 
same is ensured by conducting regular audits by fire officers as 
per Bank’s policy guidelines. 

	
The Physical Security Policy aims to provide a safe and secure 
environment to all the Branches and Offices of the Bank by 
minimizing impact of cash loss incidents, unfortunate incidents 
and the natural disaster. 

	
Further, Bank has a policy in respect of Branch Ambience, which 
includes the amenities to be provided for ensuring convenience 
to all its employees and customers.

**13. Number of Complaints on the following made by employees**

**and workers:**

Details
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23

Filed 
during 

the year

Pending 
resolution 
at the end 
of year

Remarks
Filed 
during 

the year

Pending 
resolution 
at the end 
of year

Remarks

Working
Conditions
“PNB SAMADHAAN” a formal platform for redressal of various 
grievances/ problems faced by the employees of the Bank, 
which covers all work related and personal problems faced 
by serving staff members. Other matters may be considered 
if the employees feel there is violation of rules or that there 
is a clear cut case of injustice or victimization. This is well 
streamlined process and all grievances received are redressed 
by the respective authority within TAT as per provisions of 
Bank’s guidelines.

Health &
Safety

**14. Assessments for the year:**

Particulars
% of your plants and offices that 
were assessed (by entity or statutory 
authorities or third parties) 

Health and safety practices 
Not Applicable
Working Conditions 

**15. Provide details of any corrective action taken or underway**

**to address safety-related incidents (if any) and on significant 
risks / concerns arising from assessments of health & safety 
practices and working conditions.**

	
The Bank regularly communicates and provides training to its 
employees regarding safe evacuation during instances such as 
fire. The Bank’s offices are equipped with fire safety instrument 
and regular audit is done to ensure that no such incident 
happens.  

**13-	 deZpkfj;ksa vkSj dkexkjksa }kjk fuEufyf[kr ij dh xbZ 
f'kdk;rksa dh la[;k%**

o"kZ ds  
var esa 
yafcr 
lekèkku

fVIif.k;ka
o"kZ ds 
nkSjku 
nk;j dh 
xbZ

o"kZ ds  
var esa 
yafcr 
lekèkku

fVIif.k;ka

LokLF; vkSj  
lqj{kk	

**14-	 o"kZ ds fy, ewY;kadu%**

----

**LEADERSHIP INDICATORS**

**1. 
Does the entity extend any life insurance or any compensatory 
package in the event of death of (A) Employees (Yes) (B) 
Workers (Yes).**

	
Yes, the Bank offers Payment of Lump sum Ex-gratia amount 
to the kins of the deceased employee. Compassionate 
Appointment is offered to the spouse/dependent of the 
deceased employee. Terminal benefits of the employee are 
settled on a priority basis. 

**2. 
Provide the measures undertaken by the entity to ensure 
that statutory dues have been deducted and deposited by the 
value chain partners.**

	
Not Applicable

**3. 
Provide the number of employees / workers having suffered 
high consequence work related injury / ill-health / fatalities (as 
reported in Q11 of Essential Indicators above), who have been 
are rehabilitated and placed in suitable employment or whose 
family members have been placed in suitable employment:**

Particulars
Total no. of affected 

employees/ workers
No. of employees/ 

workers that are 

rehabilitated or whose 

family members have 

been placed in suitable 

employment

FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23

Employees/workers
4*
3*
Nil
Nil

*Employees who got injured while resisting dacoity and robbery. They have 
been appropriately rewarded and have since resumed their duties.

4.	
Does the entity provide transition assistance programs to 
facilitate continued employability and the management of 
career endings resulting from retirement or termination of 
employment? (Yes/ No)

	
Yes, transition assistance training is provided to all the 
employees on verge of retirement in the last month of their 
retirement. This training included sessions on managing the 
retirement as well as opportunities’ that exist within bank and 
outside bank as well.

**5. 
Details on assessment of value chain partners:**

% of value chain partners (by value of business 

done with such partners) that were assessed 

Health and safety 
practices  
Not Applicable

Working Conditions 

**6. 
Provide details of any corrective actions taken or underway to 
address significant risks / concerns arising from assessments 
of health and safety practices and working conditions of value 
chain partners.**

	
Not Applicable 

**usr`Ro ladsrd**

**ykxw ugha**

fooj.k
çHkkfor 
deZpkfj;ksa@
dkexkjksa dh dqy 
la[;k

**5-	 ewY; J`a[kyk lk>snkjksa ds ewY;kadu ij fooj.k%**

**ykxw ugha**

----

**vko';d ladsrd**

fgrèkkjd 
lewg
D;k detksj ,oa 
oafpr lewg ds 
:i esa igpkuk 
x;k gS  
¼gka@ugha½

frekgh] vèkZokf"kZd] frekgh] 
Nekgh] okf"kZd vkSj 
vko';drkuqlkjA

cSad dk çn'kZuA fn'kkfunsZ'kksa dk vuqikyu

cSad dk çn'kZuA fn'kkfunsZ'kksa dk vuqikyu

**usr`Ro ladsrd**

----

**PRINCIPLE 4: Businesses should respect the interests of and be responsive to all its stakeholders**

**ESSENTIAL INDICATORS**

**1. 
Describe the processes for identifying key stakeholder groups of the entity.**

**There is no process to identify stakeholders. Shareholders are considered to be one of the stakeholders of the Bank.**

**A bank operates in an inter-connected world and it is significant to understand the impact of its activities on its stakeholders and vice 
versa. The stakeholders have been identified by the bank on the basis of relationships, interactions and impact they have on the business 
performance, bank operations and their value addition to the business.**

**The stakeholder groups majorly comprise of shareholders, customers, employees, regulatory bodies, etc. The Bank’s role is to aid and 
engage with the stakeholders in areas which are relevant for operations and performance of the bank. For example, employees are a vital 
stakeholder group as they are first hand contact with its customers and thereby facilitating performance of bank.**

**Regular interactions are undertaken with the stakeholder groups to evaluate and address their expectations in an efficient manner.**

**2. 
List stakeholder groups identified as key for your entity and the frequency of engagement with each stakeholder group.**

**Stakeholder**

**Group
Whether identified**

**as Vulnerable &**

**Marginalized Group  
(Yes/No)**

**Channels of communication
(Email, SMS, Newspaper,**

**Pamphlets, Advertisement,**

**Community Meetings, Notice**

**Board, Website), Other**

**Frequency of engagement
(Annually/ Half yearly/**

**Quarterly / others – please**

**specify)**

**Purpose and scope of engagement including key**

**topics and concerns raised during such engagement**

Shareholders
No
Emails, Newspapers, Letters, 
Notices, Website, Stock 
Exchange Disclosures, 
Webcast/Audio Calls, Investor 
Conferences, General 
Meetings

Quarterly, Half yearly, 
Annually and as and when 
required.

Engagement 
with 
shareholders 
during 
General 
Meetings held for seeking approval for the Audited 
Financial Results, Declaration of Dividend, Election of 
Shareholder Director, Raising of Equity Capital.  The 
queries/ concern raised during the General Meetings 
are addressed in a time bound manner. Complaints 
and Requests are resolved/responded to expeditiously. 
Interactions with Investors/Analysts etc., are also held 
from time to time and requisite disclosures in respect 
thereof are made for the benefit of all shareholders in 
accordance with regulatory guidelines.

Employees
No
Internal communication like 
emails and circulars, webinars, 
townhall meetings, Zonal 
Managers' Conferences, 
SAMADHAAN Portal

Frequently
To address and learn the expectations of employees 
while also communicating management’s expectations 
to employees. Additionally it also seeks to resolve 
various issues of employees suitably.

Customers
No
Emails, Newspapers, Letters, 
Website
Frequently
Better services and marketing

Government
No
Emails, Letters, Meetings
Engagement on regular basis 
and meeting are conducted 
as and when required. 

Performance of the Bank. Compliance of guidelines

Regulator
No
Emails, Letters, Meetings, 
Offsite and Onsite monitoring
Engagement on regular basis 
and meeting are conducted 
as and when required.

Performance of the Bank. Compliance of guidelines

**LEADERSHIP INDICATORS**

**1. 
Provide the processes for consultation between stakeholders and the Board on economic, environmental, and social topics or if 
consultation is delegated, how is feedback from such consultations provided to the Board.**

**Customers are key stakeholders of bank and it actively engages with customers on various issues like grievances, complaints, new products 
and services, customer care etc. Bank also engages with regulator through meetings, conferences, emails to discuss regarding new 
guidelines and regulatory requirements. Minutes of such discussions are recorded and shared with the Board for further action.**

----

	
Bank also ensures continuous engagement with its employees 
through various platforms and communication channels. 
These include addressing employee grievances and concerns, 
gathering employee feedback, appraising them regarding new 
products, services and developments through internal mails 
and circulations.

	
Interactions are also held with the shareholders on agenda 
items viz. approval of the Audited Financial Results, Declaration 
of Dividend, Raising of Equity Capital, Election of Shareholder 
Director, etc., at the General Meetings wherein the Directors 
of the Bank including the Chairman of Audit Committee of 
the Board, Stakeholders Relationship Committee and the 
Nomination & Remuneration Committee are also present. The 
feedback received from the shareholders is taken on record. 
Further, the decision of the shareholders (Voting Results) 
is intimated to the Stock Exchanges and also hosted on the 
website of the Bank. 

**2. 
Whether stakeholder consultation is used to support the 
identification and management of environmental, and social 
topics (Yes / No). If so, provide details of instances as to how 
the inputs received from stakeholders on these topics were 
incorporated into policies and activities of the entity.**

	
The Annual Report of the Bank inter alia containing the Financial 
Statements, Corporate Social Responsibility Report, etc. is sent 
to the shareholders at least 21 clear days before the date of 
Annual General Meeting (AGM) in compliance of the Regulatory 
Guidelines. The feedback received from the shareholders during 
the interactions at the AGM is taken into account and necessary 
action is taken, wherever required. 

**3. 
Provide details of instances of engagement with, and actions 
taken to, address the concerns of vulnerable/ marginalized 
stakeholder groups.**

	
Bank helps the marginalized, unbanked and financially excluded 
sections of the society to enable them to contribute their 
share to the economy. Access to financial services is of utmost 
importance to strengthen these marginalized sections and 
make a significant contribution to their social and economic 
development. Bank has been an active participant in various 
Government schemes such as Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan 
Yojana (PMJDY), Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yoajna (PMMY), 
Stand Up India, Start Up India, Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana 
(PMAY), Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Yojana (PMJJBY), Pradhan 
Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY), Atal Pension Yojana 
(APY), Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana (SSY) etc. and comes out 
with products and services specifically for disadvantaged and 
marginalized stakeholders.

**3-	
detksj@oafpr fgrèkkjd lewgksa dh fparkvksa dks nwj djus ds 
fy, fd, x, dk;ksZa ds lkFk lac)rk ds mnkgj.kksa dk fooj.k nsaA**

----

**PRINCIPLE 5 Businesses should respect and promote human 
rights**

**ESSENTIAL INDICATORS**

**1. 
Employees and workers who have been provided training 
on human rights issues and policy(ies) of the entity, in the 
following format:**

**Category**

**FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23
Total (A)
No. of 
employees**

**/ workers**

**covered (B)**

**%(B/A) Total 
(C)
No.
Employees/**

**workers**

**covered (D)**

**% (D/C)**

**Employees**

Permanent
102349
3061
3

NIL
Other than
permanent
0
0
0

Total 
Employees
102349
3061
3

**Workers**

Permanent

NIL
Other than
permanent
Total 
Workers

**2. 
Details of minimum wages paid to employees and workers, in 
the following format:**

**Employees are paid in line with Bipartite Settlement/Joint Note 
and there are no such minimum wages in Bank.**

**3. 
Details of remuneration / salary / wages, in the following 
format:**

**a. 	
Median remuneration/wages**

**Male
 Female**

**No.**

**Median 
remuneration/**

**salary/ wages of**

**respective category**

**No.**

**Median 
remuneration/**

salary/ wages of
respective category
Board of 
Directors 
(BoD)*
6
Rs. 35000.00
1
Rs. 35000.00

Key 
Managerial 
Personnel#
6
Rs. 290540.00^
1
Rs. 181117.45^

Employees 
other than 
BoD and 
KMP

77358
Rs. 67678.90^
24989
Rs. 63049.70

Workers
NA

*based on the Sitting Fee paid to the Non-Executive Directors during the year 
2023-24
^based on Basic and DA as on March’24 
# KMP – a) the Managing Director & Chief Executive Officer; b) Executive 
Directors(s); c) Chief Financial Officer; and d) Company Secretary  

**oxZ**

**%
¼ch@ 
,½**

**dqy 
¼lh½
doj ugh 
fd, x, 
dkfeZdksa@
dkexkjksa dh 
la[;k ¼Mh½**

**%**

**¼Mh @ 
lh½**

dkfeZd
LFkk;h
102349
3061
3

'kwU;
LFkk;h ds 
vykok vU;
0
0
0

dqy dkfeZd
102349
3061
3
dkexkj
LFkk;h

**'kwU;
LFkk;h ds 
vykok vU;
dqy 
dkexkj**

**2-	 fuEufyf[kr çk:i esa dkfeZdksa vkSj dkexkjksa dks fn, tkus 
okys U;wure osru dk fooj.k%**

**3-	 ikfjJfed@osru@etnwjh dk fooj.k] vxys çk:i esa% 
,-	
vkSlr ikfjJfed @etnwjh**

**iq#"k
efgyk**

funs'kd e.My
¼ch vks Mh½*
6
#- 35000.00
1
#- 35000.00

çeq[k çcaèkdh; 
dkfeZd#
6
#- 290540.00^
1
#- 181117.45^

**funs'kd e.My 
vkSj ds,eih ds 
vykok vU; 
dkfeZd**

77358
#- 67678.90^
24989
#- 63049.70

**dkexkj
ykxw ugh**

----

b.	
Gross wages paid to females as % of total wages paid by the 
entity, in the following format:

FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23

Gross Wages paid to females as % 
of total wages
22.28%
21.85%

**4. 
Do you have a focal point (Individual/ Committee) responsible 
for addressing human rights impacts or issues caused or 
contributed to by the business? (Yes/No)**

	
Yes, Cell at Head Office – Human Resource Development (HO-
HRD) (Reservation Cell) deals with such complaints.

**5. 
Describe the internal mechanisms in place to redress 
grievances related to human rights issues.**

	
For Employees

	
The Bank has an online grievance redressal portal “Samadhaan” 
for employees where all complaints including Human rights 
related complaints may be made.

**6. 
Number of Complaints on the following made by employees 
and workers:**

Category

FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23

Filed 
during 

the 
year

Pending 
resolution 

at the
end of 
year

Remarks
Filed 
during 

the 
year

Pending 
resolution 

at the
end of 
year

Remarks

Sexual 
Harassment
29
7
ICC Enquiry in 
under process 
within time 
line as per 
POSH Act 2013

16
03
Since 
Resolved

Discrimination 
at workplace
(Received 
through various 
Commissions)

50
(2023 
–CY*)
0
-

27
(2022 
–CY*)
0
-

Child Labour
NA

Forced Labour/
Involuntary 
Labour
NA

Wages
NA

Other human
Rights related 
issues
NA

*CY= Calendar Year	

**7. 
Complaints filed under the Sexual Harassment of Women at 
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013, 
in the following format:**

Particulars
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23

Total Complaints reported under Sexual 
Harassment on of Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) 
Act, 2013 (POSH)

29
16

Complaints on POSH as a % of female 
employees / workers
0.12%
0.06%

Complaints on POSH upheld
10
7

**ch-	 fuEufyf[kr çk:i esa laLFkk }kjk efgykvksa dks fn, x, dqy osru 
ds çfr'kr ds :i esa ldy osru%**

foÙk o"kZ 2023-24
foÙk o"kZ 2022-23
dqy etnwjh ds % ds :i esa 
efgykvksa dks fn;k x;k ldy osru

22.28%
21.85%

**5-	 ekuokfèkdkj ekeyksa ls lacafèkr f'kdk;rksa ds fuokj.k ds 
fy, vkarfjd ra=  dk o.kZu djsa & ekuo lalkèku fodkl**

**dkfeZdksa ds fy,]**

**6-	 dkfeZdks@dkexkjksa }kjk fuEufyf[kr ij dh xbZ f'kdk;rsa%**

fooj.k

o"kZ ds 
var esa 
yafcr 
lekèkku 

o"kZ dh 
lekfIr 
ij yafcr 
lekèkku

fVIi.kh

16
03
lekèkku 
ds ckn 
ls

50
(2023 – 
dSysaMj 
o"kZ*)
0
-

27
(2022 
–
dSysaMj 
o"kZ*)
0
-

cky Je	
ykxw ugh 
cyiwoZd Je 
@vuSfPNd 
Je
ykxw ugh

osru
ykxw ugh
vU; ekuo
vfèkdkj  
lacafèkr ekeys
ykxw ugh

* CY¾ dSysaMj o"kZ

29
16

POSH ij efgyk deZpkfj;ksa@dkexkjksa dh 
f'kdk;rksa dk çfr'kr
0.12%
0.06%

POSH ij f'kdk;rsa cjdjkj j[kh xbZa
10
7

----

8. 
Mechanisms to prevent adverse consequences to the 
complainant in discrimination and harassment cases.

•	
Bank has undertaken following steps to safeguard interest 
of SC/ST/OBC/PwBD/Ex-SERVICEMEN/EWS employees 
and prevent adverse consequence to the complainant in 
discrimination and harassment:

•	
“PNB SAMADHAAN”, a formal platform for redressal of 
various grievances/ problems faced by the employees 
of the Bank is available and a functionality has been 
provided in HRMS or all the employees to enable them to 
lodge their grievances/ complaints online through HRMS. 
PNB SAMADHAAN covers all work related and personal 
problems faced by serving staff members which have a 
bearing on their work. Other matters may be considered if 
the employees feel there is violation of rules or that there 
is clear cut case of injustice or victimization.

•	
The Chief Liaison Officer for SC/ST and OBC has been 
appointed in the rank of General Manager to safeguard 
the interest of employees belonging to SC/ST, OBC, Ex-
Servicemen, EWS and PwBD at Head Office level. Further, 
Liaison Officer have also been appointed at Circle Office as 
well as Zonal Office level.

•	
A reservation cell has been set up at every Circle Office/ 
Zonal Office/ Head Officer to look into the grievances of 
SC/ST and OBC employees.

•	
Bank has its Internal policy for handling the Sexual 
Harassment Complaints in line with the Sexual Harassment 
of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition & 
Redressal) Act 2013. The Internal Complaint Committees 
(ICCs) have been constituted at all administrative offices 
i.e. Circle Office, Zonal Office and Head Office level and 
compositions of the said ICCs are strictly in terms of the 
provision of the POSH Act 2013. 

9. 
Do human rights requirements form part of your business 
agreements and contracts? (Yes/No) 

	
Yes, we ensure that the Bank’s business agreement and 
contracts are with stakeholders who comply with human rights. 

10. Assessments for the year:

Category
% of your plants and offices that were 
assessed (by entity or statutory authorities 
or third parties) 

Child labour  
Not Applicable
Forced/involuntary labour  
Not Applicable
Sexual harassment 
No such assessment is being done
Discrimination at workplace 
No such assessment is being done
Wages 
Not Applicable
Others – please specify 
Not Applicable

11. Provide details of any corrective actions taken or underway 

to address significant risks / concerns arising from the 
assessments at Question 10 above. 

	
Not Applicable

**ykxw ugha**

----

**LEADERSHIP INDICATORS**

**1. 
Details of a business process being modified / introduced as a 
result of addressing human rights grievances/complaints.**

	
No.  However, the Bank ensures that its business processes 
strictly adhere to fundamental human rights in all its 
transactions, as articulated in Human Rights Statement. This 
commitment is reflected in every aspect of its operations, 
underscoring the Bank’s dedication to ethical and responsible 
conduct. Additionally, the bank conducts various awareness 
and training programmes designed to sensitize its employees 
regarding ethical behaviour, respect for human rights and the 
importance of maintaining integrity in all its business dealings.

**2. 
Details of the scope and coverage of any Human rights due-
diligence conducted.**

	
The Bank has put in place no discrimination policy underscoring 
its commitment to fair and equitable treatment for all 
stakeholders. It ensures that all activities and decisions are 
conducted with due diligence. 

**3. 
Is the premise/office of the entity accessible to differently 
abled visitors, as per the requirements of the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities Act, 2016?**

	
The Bank is continuously making efforts that all its offices/
branches are accessible without any inconvenience to differently 
abled visitors. Bank’s 11249 ATMs out of total 12131 ATMs  
(i.e. 92.73% ATMs) and Bank’s 8355 branches out of total 10136 
branches (i.e. 82.43% Branches) have ramp facilities. For, the 
remaining branches (17.57%) and ATMs (7.27%) it is impractical 
to provide ramp facility, where notice have been displayed in 
compliance of RBI guidelines.

	
The Bank refers the Reserve Banks of India and IBA’s Banker’s 
guide for customers with special needs. Bank is committed to 
offer all its banking services and products to customers with 
disabilities including visually impaired without discrimination.

**4. 
Details on assessment of value chain partners:**

Category
% of value chain partners (by 
value of business done with such 
partners) that were assessed

Sexual Harassment

NA 

Discrimination at workplace

Child Labour

Forced Labour/Involuntary 
Labour

Wages

Others – please specify

**5. 
Provide details of any corrective actions taken or underway 
to address significant risks / concerns arising from the 
assessments at Question 4 above.**

	
Not Applicable

**usr`Ro ladsrd**

**2-	 fdlh Hkh ekuokfèkdkj lacaèkh tkap ds nk;js vkSj dojst dk fooj.kA**

**4-	 J`a[kyk lk>snkjksa ds ewY;kadu fooj.k%**

**ykxw ugha**

**ykxw ugha**

----

**PRINCIPLE 6: Businesses should respect and make efforts to 
protect and restore the environment**

**ESSENTIAL INDICATORS**

**1. 
Details of total energy consumption (in Joules or multiples) 
and energy intensity, in the following format:**

Parameter
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23

From renewable sources

Total electricity  
consumption (A)
1,126 Giga Joule 
1,065 Giga Joule

Total fuel consumption (B)
NIL
NIL

Energy consumption through 
other sources (C)
NIL
NIL

Total energy consumed from 
renewable sources (A+B+C)
1,126 Giga Joule
1,065 Giga Joule

From non-renewable sources

Total electricity  
consumption (D)
9,90,950 Giga Joule
10,50,133 Giga Joule

Total fuel consumption (E)
2,32,086 Giga Joule
2,26,148 Giga Joule

Energy consumption through 
other sources (F)
NA
NA

Total energy consumed from 
non-renewable sources 
(D+E+F)
12,23,036 Giga Joule
12,76,281 Giga Joule

Total energy consumed 
(A+B+C+D+E+F)
12,24,162 Giga Joule
12,77,346 Giga Joule

Energy intensity per rupee 
of turnover (Total energy 
consumed / Revenue from 
operations)

1.02
1.31

Energy intensity per rupee 
of turnover adjusted for 
Purchasing Power Parity 
(PPP)
(Total  energy consumed / 
Revenue from operations 
adjusted for PPP)

NA
NA

Energy intensity in terms of 
physical output
NA
NA

Energy intensity (optional) – 
the relevant metric may be 
selected by the entity
-
-

Note: Indicate if any independent assessment/ evaluation/assurance has been 
carried out by an external agency? – No

**2. 
Does the entity have any sites / facilities identified as 
designated consumers (DCs) under the Performance, Achieve 
and Trade (PAT) Scheme of the Government of India? (Y/N) 
If yes, disclose whether targets set under the PAT scheme 
have been achieved. In case targets have not been achieved, 
provide the remedial action taken, if any.**

    	
Our Bank is not identified as DC, hence the same is not 
applicable. 

**uohdj.kh; lzksrksa ls**

**dqy fo|qr miHkksx ¼,½
1]126 xhxk twy
1]065 xhxk twy**

**uohdj.kh; lzksrksa ls miHkksx 
dh xbZ dqy ÅtkZ ¼,$ch$lh½ 1]126 xhxk twy
1]065 xhxk twy**

**xSj&uohdj.kh; lzksrksa ls**

**dqy fctyh miHkksx ¼Mh½
9]90]950 xhxk twy
10]50]133 xhxk twy**

**dqy bZaèku miHkksx ¼bZ½
2]32]086 xhxk twy
2]26]148 xhxk twy**

**dqy ÅtkZ miHkksx  
¼,$ch$lh$Mh$bZ$,Q½
12]24]162 xhxk twy
12]77]346 xhxk twy**

1.02
1.31

**ykxw ugh 
ykxw ugh**

**HkkSfrd mRiknu ds lanHkZ esa 
ÅtkZ rhozrk
ykxw ugh 
ykxw ugh**

-
-

uksV% crk,a fd D;k fdlh ckgjh ,tsalh }kjk dksbZ Lora= vkadyu@ewY;kadu@vkÜoklu 
fd;k x;k gS\ & ugha

**gekjk cSad Mhlh ds :i esa fpfàr ugha gS] blfy, ;g ykxw  
ugha gSA**

----

**3. 
Provide details of the following disclosures related to water, in 
the following format:**

**Parameter
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23**

**Water withdrawal by source (in kilolitres)**

(i) Surface water 
3,68,461
3,18,562

(ii) Groundwater 
NA
NA

(iii) Third party water 
11,28,752
9,55,687

(iv) Seawater / desalinated water 
NA
NA

(v) Others  
NA
NA

Total volume of water withdrawal (in 
kilolitres) (i + ii + iii + iv + v) 
14,97,213
12,74,249

**Total volume of water consumption (in 
kilolitres)**

14,97,213
12,74,249

Water intensity per rupee of turnover 
(Total water consumption / Revenue from 
operations) 

1.24
1.31

Water intensity per rupee of turnover 
adjusted for Purchasing Power Parity 
(PPP) 
(Total  water consumption / Revenue from 
operations adjusted for PPP) 

NA
NA

Water intensity in terms of physical 
output 
NA
NA

Water intensity (optional) – the relevant 
metric may be selected by the entity 
NA
NA

Note: Indicate if any independent assessment/ evaluation/assurance has been 
carried out by an external agency? (Y/N) - No

**4. 
Provide the following details related to water discharged:**

**Parameter 
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23**

**Water discharge by destination and level of treatment (in kilolitres)**

(i)  To Surface water 
The Bank does not generate 
industrial 
wastewater. 
However, for the sewage that 
is produced, Bank have taken 
proactive steps by installing 
sewage treatment plants (STP) 
at some of our larger office 
premises. 
The 
majority 
of 
offices of Bank are branches 
spread nationwide, wherein 
the sewage is discharged as per 
local guidelines i.e. discharge is 
made to municipality or other 
bodies as applicable, wherein 
suitable treatment is done by 
them. Hence, it is not included 
in Bank’s reporting.

     - No treatment 

     - With treatment – please specify 
       level of treatment 

(ii) To Groundwater 

      -  No treatment 

              -   With treatment – please specify level  
        of treatment 

(iii)  To Seawater 

        - No treatment 

        - With treatment – please specify 
          level of treatment 

(iv) Sent to third-parties  

       - No treatment 

       - With treatment – please specify  
         level of treatment 

(v) Others 

      - No treatment 

      - With treatment – please specify  
        level of treatment 

**Total water discharged (in kilolitres)**

Note: Indicate if any independent assessment/ evaluation/assurance has been 
carried out by an external agency? (Y/N) - No

(i) Hkw&i`"B ty
3,68,461
3,18,562

(ii) Hkwty
ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha

(iii) FkMZ ikVÊ okVj
11,28,752
9,55,687

ty miHkksx dk dqy vk;ru
¼fdyksyhVj esa½
14,97,213
12,74,249

**ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha**

**HkkSfrd vkmViqV ds lanHkZ esa ty dh 
xgurk
ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha**

----

5. 
Has the entity implemented a mechanism for Zero Liquid 
Discharge? If yes, provide details of its coverage and 
implementation.  	

	
The Bank’s Head Office is installed with a zero liquid discharge 
Sewage Treatment Plant. Further, in other major buildings like 
PNB Pragati Towers BKC, Mumbai and PNB Building at Gurugram, 
Sewage Treatment Plants have been installed. As such, the STP 
treated water is reused towards horticulture and toilet flush in 
these buildings.

**6. 
Please provide details of air emissions (other than GHG 
emissions) by the entity, in the following format:**

	
The nature of business of our Bank does not amount to air 
pollutants as defined in the Air (Prevention and control of 
Pollution) Act, 1981, as such not contributing to air pollution. 
The Head Office and administrative offices of our Bank has 
placed indoor plants in their office premises to keep a check on 
the indoor air pollution.

Parameter
Please 
specify unit
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23

NOx

NOT APPLICABLE

SOx
Particulate matter (PM)
Persistent organic 
pollutants (POP)
Volatile organic 
compounds (VOC)
Hazardous air pollutants 
(HAP)
Others –please specify

Note: Indicate if any independent assessment/ evaluation/assurance has been 
carried out by an external agency? (Y/N) - NA

**7. 
Provide details of greenhouse gas emissions (Scope 1 and 
Scope 2 emissions) & its intensity, in the following format:**

Parameter 
Unit 
FY 2023-24 
FY 2022-23 

Total Scope 1 emissions 
(Break-up of the GHG into 
CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, 
SF6, NF3, if available) 

Metric tonnes of 
CO2 equivalent 
8,494
7,866

Total Scope 2 emissions 
(Break-up of the GHG into 
CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, 
SF6, NF3, if available) 

Metric tonnes of 
CO2 equivalent 
1,97,089
2,08,860

Total Scope 1 and Scope 
2 emission intensity per 
rupee of turnover 
(Total Scope 1 and Scope 2 
GHG emissions / Revenue 
from operations) 

-
1.71
2.23

Total Scope 1 and Scope 
2 
emission 
intensity 

per rupee of turnover 
adjusted 

NA
NA
NA

**ykxw ugha**

ehfVªd Vu CO2 
ds led{k 

8,494
7,866

ehfVªd Vu CO2 
led{k 

1,97,089
2,08,860

-
1.71
2.23

çfr #i;k VuZvksoj ij 
dqy Ldksi 1 vkSj Ldksi 2 
mRltZu rhozrk lek;ksftr

**ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha**

----

Parameter 
Unit 
FY 2023-24 
FY 2022-23 

for 
Purchasing 
Power 

Parity (PPP) 
(Total Scope 1 and Scope 2 
GHG emissions / Revenue 
from operations adjusted 
for PPP) 

NA
NA
NA

Total Scope 1 and Scope 
2 emission intensity in 
terms of physical output 

NA
NA
NA

Total Scope 1 and Scope 
2 
emission 
intensity 

(optional) – the relevant 
metric may be selected by 
the entity 

NA
NA
NA

Note: Indicate if any independent assessment/ evaluation/assurance has been 
carried out by an external agency? (Y/N) - No

**8. 
Does the entity have any project related to reducing Green 
House Gas emission? If Yes, then provide details.**

	
Bank has adopted following measures to reduce the GHG 
emission:

a)	
Planting of approximately 1.10 lakh plants in the ongoing 
tree plantation drive PNB PALAASH.

b)	
Installation of EV charging stations to encourage the use of 
EVs.

c)	
Installation of energy efficient five star ACs and electrical 
equipment in administrative offices, back offices and 
branches.

d)	
Bank has already installed 612 KWp of Roof top solar 
System in the existing buildings and planning to install 603 
KWp solar systems in other Bank’s buildings.

e)	
PNB Head Office building situated at Dwarka, New Delhi is 
a five star GRIHA rated building.  The Bank is planning for 
GREEN buildings in ongoing building construction projects.

f)	
Installation of occupancy sensor lights in administrative 
buildings.

g)	
Use of Solar heaters in Head Office Building.

h)	
Construction of Cycling stand in the Head Office to 
encourage commute by cycles in place of petrol or diesel 
vehicles resulting in decrease of Green House Gas as well 
as carbon footprint in the environment. 

i)	
Emphasis is being given to use carpool services by daily 
commuters of employees.

j)	
LED light fixtures which are most energy efficient fixtures 
are being used in Bank’s premises. 

k)	
Installation of LED glow sign boards with timer facility 
which automatically switches off at daylight.

l)	
Use of Gas based Gen-sets in our Head Office building.

m)  Installation of hand dryers in washrooms to reduce 
consumption of paper napkins.	

n)     Drive for recycling of plastic waste.

**ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha**

**ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha**

**ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha**

**,u½ 	IykfLVd dpjs ds iqupZØ.k ds fy, vfHk;kuA**

----

**9. 
Provide details related to waste management by the entity, in 
the following format:**

Parameter
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23
Total Waste generated (in metric tonnes) 
Plastic waste (A) 
Plastic waste generated from our office premises 
are minimal as the majority of the plastics used 
in our office premises including plastic bags are 
biodegradable in nature. The amount generated 
is negligible in terms of metric tonnes, hence it 
isn’t relevant to our activities. 
E-waste (B)  
Hardware 
disposed 
off 
by 
buy 
back 
option 
amounting 
Rs.93,18,160.  Also 10 
tonnes of e-waste like 
servers, monitor, CPU/
All in one & Printer 
were disposed off by 
e-waste scrap dealer 
(Amount Rs.10,33,798)

Hardware 
disposed 
off 
by 
buy 
back 
option 
amounting 
Rs.51,95,870.

Bio-medical waste (C) 
Our services do not involve producing or disposing 
of Bio- medical waste of any kind. Hence this is 
not applicable in our industry. 
Construction and 
demolition waste (D) 
We do not produce or dispose of any kind of 
construction debris or demolition waste. Hence it 
is not applicable. 

Battery waste (E)  
Majority of Battery waste is recycled

Radioactive waste (F)  
Our services do not involve producing of 
radioactive waste of any kind. Hence this is not 
applicable in our industry. 
Other Hazardous 
waste. Please specify, 
if any.  (G) 

Our services do not involve producing or disposing 
hazardous waste of any kind. Hence this is not 
applicable in our industry. 
Other Non-hazardous 
waste generated (H). 
Please specify, if any. 
Break-up by 
composition i.e. by 
materials relevant to 
the sector) 

Our services do not involve producing or disposing 
of Bio- medical waste of any kind. Hence this is 
not applicable in our industry.

Total (A+B + C + D + E 
+ F + G+ H)
NA
NA

Waste intensity per 
rupee of turnover 
(Total waste generated 
/ Revenue from 
operations)

NA
NA

Waste intensity per 
rupee of turnover 
adjusted for 
Purchasing Power 
Parity (PPP) 
(Total waste 
generated/ Revenue 
from operations 
adjusted for PPP) 

NA
NA

**Waste intensity in 
terms of physical 
output**

NA
NA

dqy ¼,+ch+lh+Mh+bZ++
,Q+th+,p½
ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha 

**ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha**

**ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha**

**HkkSfrd vkmViqV ds 
lanHkZ esa vif'k"V 
rhozrk 
ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha**

----

Parameter
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23
Waste intensity 
(optional) – the 
relevant metric may 
be selected by the 
entity 

NA
NA

For each category of waste generated, total waste recovered through 
recycling, re-using or other recovery operations (in metric tonnes) 

Category of waste
(i) Recycled 

NA
(ii) Re-used 
(iii) Other recovery 
operations 
Total
For each category of waste generated, total waste disposed by nature of 
disposal method (in metric tonnes) 

Category of waste
(i) Incineration 
Our waste generation is minimal and consequently 
there is no requirement of incineration or 
landfilling activities. 

(ii) Landfilling 

(iii) Other disposal 
operations 

Total 
NA
NA

Note: Indicate if any independent assessment/ evaluation/assurance has been 
carried out by an external agency? (Y/N) - No

**10. Briefly describe the waste management practices adopted in**

**your establishments. Describe the strategy adopted by your 
company to reduce usage of hazardous and toxic chemicals 
in your products and processes and the practices adopted to 
manage such wastes.**

	
As a Bank our mission is to reduce waste production and recycle 
as much as possible. Our waste primarily comprises of food, 
waste, paper and e-waste. 

	
Reduction of plastic waste: We have stopped procurement 
of plastic document folders and encourage our employees to 
use glass bottles at our offices to reduce the number of plastic 
bottles being discarded after use. All our facilities use 100% 
biodegradable plastic garbage bags to collect and dispose of dry 
and wet waste. 

	
Reducing paper and printing consumption: We have 
implemented strong measures for digitising processes to 
reduce the need for paper. Further minimising the usage of 
paper across offices is an ongoing activity. 

	
E-waste management: Our E-waste broadly includes computers, 
servers, scanners, UPSs, batteries, etc. All such E-wastes are 
being disposed off through registered E-waste vendors.

**11. If the entity has operations/offices in/around ecologically**

**sensitive areas (such as national parks, wildlife sanctuaries, 
biosphere reserves, wetlands, biodiversity hotspots, forests, 
coastal regulation zones etc.) where environmental approvals / 
clearances are required, please specify details in the following 
format:**

ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha 

vif'k"V dh Js.kh

¼i½ iqupZfØr

¼ii½ iqu% mi;ksx

¼iii½ vU; iquiZzkfIr dk;Z

dqy

vif'k"V dh Js.kh 

¼iii½ vU; fuiVku dk;Z

dqy
ykxw ugha 
ykxw ugha 

----

	
The Bank does not have branches/offices inside the ecologically 
sensitive areas. Accordingly, the same is not applicable to Bank.

S. 
No. 
Location of 

operations/
offices 

Type of 

operations 

Whether 
the 
conditions 
of 

environmental approval / clearance 
are being complied with? (Y/N) 
If no, the reasons thereof and 
corrective action taken, if any. 

 Not Applicable

**12. Details of environmental impact assessments of projects**

**undertaken by the entity based on applicable laws, in the 
current financial year:**

	
Not Applicable.

**13. Is the entity compliant with the applicable environmental**

**law/ regulations/ guidelines in India; such as the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, Air (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, Environment protection act and 
rules thereunder (Y/N).  If not, provide details of all such non-
compliances, in the following format:**

	
The Bank is complying with applicable statutory guidelines.

**LEADERSHIP INDICATORS**

**1. 
Water withdrawal, consumption and discharge in areas of 
water stress (in kilolitres):**

	
For each facility / plant located in areas of water stress, provide 
the following information:  

(i) 
Name of the area - NA

(ii) 
Nature of operations - NA

**(iii) Water withdrawal, consumption and discharge in the**

**following format:**

	
The Bank use of water is strictly limited to human consumption. 
As we are not a manufacturing organization, the prescribed 
table does not apply to the Bank. However, we are adhering to 
following measures. In the office, efforts have been made to 
ensure that water is used sparingly. Sensor taps are put in office 
washrooms in a variety of offices to reduce water consumption. 
Domestic trash (sewage) from offices and branches is not 
allowed to enter aquatic bodies without treatment.

Ø- 
la- 
ifjpkyu@
dk;kZy;ksa dk 
LFkku

**ykxw ugha**

**ykxw ughaA**

**cSad ykxw oS/kkfud fn'kkfunsZ'kksa dk vuqikyu dj jgk gSA**

	
¼i½	 {ks= dk uke & ykxw ugha

	
¼ii½	ifjpkyu dh ç—fr & ykxw ugha 

----

Parameter
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23

Water withdrawal by source (in kilolitres) 

(i) Surface water 
Bank has installed Rain Water Harvesting 
(RWH) system is majority of its owned 
buildings to arrest the rain water (surface 
water) run-off for future usage. All upcoming 
/under-construction 
buildings 
have 
been extensively planned for maximum 
consolidation/ collection of rain water 
(surface water) run-off.

Water requirement is fulfilled upon obtaining 
water connection from the local statutory 
authority. However, during peak summer 
months, as per requirement, the same local 
statutory authority is approached for extra 
supply.

(ii) Groundwater 

(iii) Third party water 

Not Applicable

(iv) Seawater / desalinated  
       water 

(v) Others  

Total volume of water 
withdrawal (in kilolitres) 

Total volume of water 
consumption (in kilolitres)  

Water intensity per rupee of 
turnover 
(Water consumed / turnover) 

Water intensity (optional) – the 
relevant metric may be selected 
by the entity 

Water discharge by destination and level of treatment (in kilolitres) 

(i) Into Surface water 

 Not Applicable

     - No treatment 

     - With treatment – please 
        specify level of treatment 

(ii) Into Groundwater 

     - No treatment 

     - With treatment – please  
       specify level of treatment 

(iii) Into Seawater 

       - No treatment 

       - With treatment – please 
         specify level of treatment 

(iv) Sent to third-parties  

       - No treatment 

       - With treatment – please 
          specify level of treatment 

(v) Others 

     - No treatment 

     - With treatment – please 
       specify level of treatment 

Total water discharged (in 
kilolitres)  

Note: Indicate if any independent assessment/ evaluation/assurance has been 
carried out by an external agency? (Y/N) - No

¼ii½ Hkwty

¼iii½ FkMZ ikVhZ okVj 

ykxw ugha

ykxw ugha

----

**2. 
Please provide details of total Scope 3 emissions & its intensity, 
in the following format:**

**Parameter
Unit
**FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23**

Category 1- Purchased Goods and 
Services 
Metric 
tonnes 
of CO2 
equivalent 

525.00 
- 

Category 3: Fuel and Energy 
Related activities (not included in 
scope 1 and scope 2)

8,175 
8,360 

Category 5 – Waste generated 
in operations (Paper Waste and 
E-Waste)

83 
- 

Category 6 – Business Travel
11,336 
8,191 

Category 7: Employee Commuting 
81,787 
- 

Category 15- Investments 
(Financed Emissions) 
100,538,098 
96,090,123 

Total Scope 3 emissions***
MtCO2e
100,640,004 
96,106,674 

Total Scope 3 emissions per rupee 
of turnover*
MtCO2e / 
INR Lakh
             8.37
9.88 

Note: Indicate if any independent assessment/ evaluation/assurance has been 
carried out by an external agency? :    No

***Includes Scope 3 emissions for category 1 (Purchased goods and services), 
category 3 (Fuel and energy related activities, category 5 (waste generated in 
operations), category 6 (business travel), category 7 (employee commuting) and 
category 15 (investments)
**Scope 3 emissions for category 1- Purchased Goods & Services (525 MtCO2e), 
category 5- waste generated in operations- paper (82.68 MtCO2e) and category 7- 
employee commuting (81,787.19 MtCO2e) has been computed only for FY24

*Total Income for the year has been considered in the denominator

**3.	
With respect to the ecologically sensitive areas reported at 
Question 11 of Essential Indicators above, provide details of 
significant direct & indirect impact of the entity on biodiversity 
in such areas along-with prevention and remediation activities.**

**The Bank deals in providing financial services and as such we 
do not have direct impacts on biodiversity. However, prior to 
undertaking construction of new Bank buildings, all permissions 
/ no-objection certificates from the relevant local statutory 
authority are obtained viz. Environmental Assessment Authority, 
Forest Department, mining etc. to mitigate any adverse impact 
on bio-diversity.**

**4. 
If the entity has undertaken any specific initiatives or used 
innovative technology or solutions to improve resource 
efficiency, or reduce impact due to emissions / effluent 
discharge / waste generated, please provide details of the 
same as well as outcome of such initiatives, as per the 
following format:**

8,175 
8,360 

83 
- 

Js.kh 6 & O;kolkf;d ;k=k
11,336 
8,191 
Js.kh 7% deZpkjh vkokxeu
81,787 
- 
Js.kh 15& fuos'k ¼foÙkiksf"kr 
mRltZu½
100,538,098 
96,090,123 

----

Initiative 

undertaken
Details of the initiative (Web-link, 
if any, may be provided along-
with summary)

Outcome of
the initiative

a) 	 Installation of roof top solar energy plants on Bank’s own 
buildings for utilising renewable energy and the same has 
been planned for existing Bank owned buildings and for Bank’s 
upcoming buildings also.

b) 	 Procurement of BEE star-rated energy efficient electrical & 
electronic equipment’s. 3 or more star rated AC’s are being 
used in bank’s premise which consume less energy.

c) 	 LED light fixtures which are most energy efficient fixtures are 
being used in Bank’s premises.

d) 	 Installation of occupancy sensors in Bank’s own administrative 
buildings.

e) 	 Guidelines have been issued for maintaining the operational 
temperature of AC’s across Bank’s premises at 24° C or more in 
line with the Government of India guidelines.

f) 	 Further LED glow sign boards are being installed with timer 
facility which automatically switches off at daylight.

g) 	 Bank has set up Electric Vehicle (EV) charging station in the 
head office building.

h) 	 Bank has planted more than 1 lacs plants under its drive name 
Palaash to help to increase the oxygen in air.

i) 	 Bank conduct Electrical audit & fire Safety audit of Bank 
Branches /premises in every two years to prevent any kind of 
faults.

**5. 
Does the entity have a business continuity and disaster 
management plan? Give details in 100 words/ web link.**

	
Business Continuity Plan

	
Bank has in place Board approved Policy for Business Continuity 
Plan (BCP) and Disaster Management Plan which covers all the 
business operations of the Bank including IT, Non-IT and HR 
related aspects. It outlines well defined governance structure to 
establish, oversee and implement an effective BCP aligned with 
the regulatory guidelines. It incorporates emergency response 
plan, disaster recovery plan, pandemic response along with the 
provision of testing, training, backup, alternate site, recovery 
arrangements which together enable bank to respond and 
recover from disaster and ensure reliability and seamless 
continuity of operations. It also undergoes periodic reviews and 
audits for its effectiveness.

**6. 
Disclose any significant adverse impact to the environment, 
arising from the value chain of the entity. What mitigation or 
adaptation measures have been taken by the entity in this 
regard.**

	
Not Applicable 

**7. 
Percentage of value chain partners (by value of business done 
with such partners) that were assessed for environmental 
impacts.**

	
Not Applicable 

**dkjksckj fujarjrk ;kstuk**

**ykxw ugha**

**ykxw ugha**

----

**PRINCIPLE 7 Businesses, when engaging in influencing public 
and regulatory policy, should do so in a manner that is 
responsible and transparent**

**1. 
a) Number of affiliations with trade and industry chambers/**

**associations.**

	
	
There are Seven (7) affiliations with trade and industry 
chambers/ associations

**b) 
List the top 10 trade and industry chambers/ associations 
(determined based on the total members of such body) the 
entity is a member of/ affiliated to.**

S. 
No.
Name of the trade and industry 
chambers/ associations
Reach of trade and 
industry chambers/ 

associations
(State/National)

1
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC)
National

2
ASSOCHAM
National

3
Confederation of Indian Industry
National

4
Delhi Productivity Council
State

5
Standing Council of Public Enterprises 
(SCOPE)
National

6
PHD Chamber of Commerce
National

7
Federation of Indian Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry (FICCI)
National

**2. 
Provide details of corrective action taken or underway on any 
issues related to anti-competitive conduct by the entity, based 
on adverse orders from regulatory authorities.**

**Name of authority
Brief of the case
Corrective action taken**

NIL

**LEADERSHIP INDICATORS**

1.	
Details of public policy positions advocated by the entity: 

S. 
No.
Public policy advocated 

(Policies available in public 

domain)

Method 
resorted 
for such 

advocacy

Whether 
information 

available 

in public 
domain? 
(Yes/No)

Frequency 

of Review by 

Board
(Annually/ 

Half yearly/ 

Quarterly 

/ Others 
– please 

specify)

Web 

Link, if  
available

1
KYC-AML Policy
Bank is 
governed  
by the 
regulation 
of  
banking 
industry, 
and 
Bank's 
internal 
policy is 
governed 
by the 
same.

Yes

Annually 
& as and 
when 
requried

www.pnbindia.in

2
Grievance Redressal 
Policy
3
Customer 
Compensation Policy
4
Model policy on Bank 
Deposits
5
Cheque Collection 
Policy
6
Whistle Blower Policy 
for bank
7
Customer Rights Policy
8
Social Media Policy

**1-	 d½ O;kikj ,oa m|ksx eaMyksa@la?kksa ls lac)rk dh la[;kA**

**Ø- 
la
O;kikj ,oa m|ksx eaMyksa@ 
la?kksa dk uke
O;kikj ,oa m|ksx 
eaMyksa/la?kksa dh igqap 
¼jkT;/jk"Vªh;½**

**usr`Ro ladsrd**

**1-	
laLFkk }kjk lefFkZr lkoZtfud uhfr inksa dk fooj.k%**

osc 
fyad] 
;fn 
miyC/k 
gks

**gk¡**

**gj o"kZ 
vkSj 
tc Hkh 
vko';d 
gks**

www.pnbindia.in

----

**PRINCIPLE 8 Businesses should promote inclusive growth and 
equitable development**

**ESSENTIAL INDICATORS**

**1. 
Details of Social Impact Assessments (SIA) of projects 
undertaken by the entity based on applicable laws, in the 
current financial year.**

	
Not Applicable 

**2. 
Provide information on project(s) for which ongoing 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) is being undertaken by 
your entity, in the following format:**

	
Not Applicable

**3. 
Describe the mechanisms to receive and redress grievances of 
the community.**

	
The Bank has an on-line Grievance Redressal Management 
Portal called Centralized Grievance Redressal Monitoring 
System (CGRMS), which is in-house Portal. Through this system, 
the customer gets an immediate acknowledgement and can 
keep a track of the complaint also. Various Channels through 
which Customer Grievances is received are as under:

•	
Contact centres (Toll free/ Tolled numbers)

•	
Internet Banking Service / Mobile Banking app / Corporate 
Website.

•	
Email at care@pnb.co.in

•	
MD & CEO / Chairman/ Ministry of Finance/RBI etc.

•	
Department of Public Grievance (CPGRAM)/INGRAM.

•	
Social Media such as Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn and other 
social media platforms.

•	
Post

•	
Complaints in Person at Branch Offices.

	
The customer’s complaints are stored in two online portals 
i.e CGRMS Portal and Contact Centre’s CRM Portal. The 
nature of complaints received at CGRMS Portal and CRM 
Portal are largely Non-Digital & Digital transaction related 
respectively. 

**4. 
Percentage of input material (inputs to total inputs by value) 
sourced from suppliers:**

**FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23**

Directly sourced from small 
producers/MSMEs 
15.68%
Not Available

Directly from within India
96.27%*
21.13%*

*The figure is inclusive of materials sourced from MSMEs. The MSE 
procurement is available only for the procurement done through GeM portal. 
Hence the above figures are for the procurement of Bank through GeM only.

(Calculation done as percentage of total SFF & Maintenance expenses 
excluding depreciation)

**fl)kar 8 dkjksckj dks lekos'kh fodkl vkSj U;k;laxr fodkl 
dks c<+kok nsuk pkfg,**

**vko';d ladsrd**

**ykxw ugha**

**ykxw ugha**

**3-	 leqnk; dh f'kdk;rsa çkIr djus vkSj muds fuokj.k ds ra= 
dk o.kZu djsaA**

••	 bZesy djsa care@pnb.co.in

••	 yksd f'kdk;r foHkkx ¼lhihthvkj,,e½@vkbZ,uthvkj,,eA

••	 Mkd

•	
'kk[kk dk;kZy;ksa esa O;fäxr :i ls f'kdk;rA

lh/ks Hkkjr ds Hkhrj ls
96.27%*
21.13%*

----

**5. 
Job creation in smaller towns – Disclose wages paid to persons 
employed (including employees or workers employed on 
a permanent or non-permanent / on contract basis) in the 
following locations, as % of total wage cost**

**Location
FY 2023-24
FY 2022-23**

Rural
21.58%
21.08%

Semi-urban
18.05%
17.73%

Urban
32.35%
32.72%

Metropolitan
28.03%
28.47%

(Place categorized as per RBI Classification System - rural / semi-urban / urban 
/ metropolitan)

**LEADERSHIP INDICATORS**

**1. 
Provide details of actions taken to mitigate any negative 
social impacts identified in the Social Impact Assessments 
(Reference: Question 1 of Essential Indicators above):**

	
Not Applicable

**2. 
Provide the following information on CSR projects undertaken 
by your entity in designated aspirational districts as identified 
by government bodies:**

**S. 
No.
State
Aspirational**

**District
Amount spent**

**(In INR)**

1
Uttar Pradesh

Fatehpur
42362

Sonbhadra
50000

Chandauli
281030

2
Assam

Barpeta
26800

Hailakandi
54890

Darrang
57200

3
Mumbai
Gadchiroli
48000

4
Rajasthan
Jaisalmer
75200

Karauli 
31500

5
Uttarakhand
Udham Singh Nagar
125000

Haridwar
279000

6
Gujarat
Dahod
62000

Narmada
781000

7
Himachal Pradesh
Chamba
34000

8
Andhara Pradesh
Visakhapatnam
295600

Vizianagaram
100000

9
Telangana
Bhupalapally
50000

10
Karnataka
Hubli
40000

**3. a) Do you have a preferential procurement policy where you**

**give preference to purchase from suppliers comprising 
marginalized /vulnerable groups? (Yes/No)**

	
	
Bank has a Board approved Procurement Policy which is 
broadly based on General Financial rules circulated by 

1
mÙkj çns'k
Qrsgiqj
42362
lksuHkæ
50000
pankSyh
281030

2
vle
ckjisVk
26800
gSykdkaMh
54890
njkax
57200
3
eqacbZ
xMfpjksyh
48000

4
jktLFkku 
tSlyesj
75200
djkSyh
31500

5
mÙkjk[kaM
m/ke flag uxj
125000
gfj}kj
279000

6
xqtjkr
nkgksn
62000
ueZnk
781000
7
fgekpy çns'k
pack
34000

8
vka/kz çns'k
fo'kk[kkiÙkue
295600
fot;uxje
100000
9
rsyaxkuk
HkwikyiYyh
50,000
10
dukZVd
gqcyh
40000

----

department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. Further, 
the policy also includes guidelines issued by MSME Ministry 
for Preferential Procurement through Micro and Small 
Enterprise (MSE’s). For instance, we have procured 15.68% 
of inputs from small producers through Government 
e-marketplace (GeM) portal. Start-ups are also given certain 
relaxations to ensure their participation in the tender for 
Bank’s procurement. Under guidelines, certain targets are 
also fixed for procurement from MSE’s of SC/ST Entrepreneur.

	
	
Also Bank’s Procurement Policy includes Purchase Preference 
Policy issued by Department for Promotion of Industry and 
Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce & Industry.

       b) From which marginalized /vulnerable groups do you 

**procure?**

       		
Micro and Small enterprises, Startups.

	
c) What percentage of total procurement (by value) does it 

**constitute?**

	
	
The primary functions of the bank include the acceptance 
of deposits and the provision of credit financing and 
procurement from marginalized/vulnerable group remains 
minimal in comparison to the bank’s total procurement. 
However, we have directly source from small/ MSMEs 
producers.  The same has already been cited at point 4, 
Principle 8 (essential Indicator).

**4. 
Details of the benefits derived and shared from the intellectual 
properties owned or acquired by your entity (in the current 
financial year), based on traditional knowledge:**

	
Not Applicable

**5. 
Details of corrective actions taken or underway, based on 
any adverse order in intellectual property related disputes 
wherein usage of traditional knowledge is involved.**

     	
Not Applicable

**6.	
Details of beneficiaries of CSR Projects: during FY 2023-24**

	
Bank undertakes CSR activities keeping in mind our social 
commitments through which all sections of the society are 
benefitted in large irrespective of caste, colour etc. 

	
Additionally, Bank in its CSR policy has provision to contribute 
any other such fund set-up by the Central Government or the 
State Governments for socio-economic development & relief 
and funds for the welfare of the marginalized section of the 
society. Any proposal related to above mentioned funds are 
considered on priority basis. CSR activities undertaken during 
FY23-24 are as follows:

	
During the period FY 2023-2024, the following CSR activities 
have been undertaken:

•	
Infrastructure support to 2 Delhi Government schools on 
129th Foundation Day.

**[k½	 vki fdu misf{kr@detksj lewgksa ls [kjhnkjh djrs 
gSa\**

**lw{e ,oa y?kq m|e] LVkVZ&viA**

**ykxw ugha**

**ykxw ugha**

**6-	 lh,lvkj ifj;kstukvksa ds ykHkkfFkZ;ksa dk fooj.k% foÙk o"kZ 
2023&24 ds nkSjku**

•	 129os LFkkiuk fnol ij fnYyh ljdkj ds 2 Ldwyksa dks cqfu;knh 
<kaps dk lg;ksx fd;k x;kA

----

•	
Support to Nimbark Math Seva Samiti Trust towards 
implementation of Blindness control and Eye screening 
programe in the District of Hooghly & Paschim Medinipur 
under Arambag constituency.

•	
Collaboration with ZO Dehradun for providing one X-Ray 
Machine to Bhawan Shri Kalika Mata Samiti.

•	
“Ek Se Sreshtha” campaign for providing educational 
infrastructure to schools in Hamirpur district of Shimla.

•	
Computer, inverter and other school furniture were 
provided during an event held with Herald Academy 
Junior Public School, Pauri Garhwal, Uttrakhand.

•	
Support to shelter home Apna Ghar, Bawana for daily 
supplies in Delhi.

•	
Support to Shiksha ‘o’ Anusandhan for procurement of 1 
ventilator and 10 ICU beds in Bhubaneshwar.

•	
Partnered with BSF for purchase of 200 steel benches at 
JCP Attari Stadium, Amritsar.

•	
Donated one ambulance to SRIHER trust for helping 
economically weaker section.

•	
PNB PRERNA members conducted flood relief activity at 
Noida link road Mayur Vihar Phase 2 Delhi for affected 
people.

•	
Support to Cansupport on 15th Aug 2023 for the people 
who are affected with cancer.

•	
Collaborated with Boccia sports federation of India for 
purchase of boccia balls. 

•	
Provided one roti maker to Bhaorao Deoras Seva Nyas at 
Powergrid Vishram Sadan near AIIMS Trauma centre.

•	
National flag installation at Upper Primary School 
Chhanbey block Mirzapur.

•	
Supported Maolkekei foundation to help internally 
displaced people of Manipur.

•	
Aided National Association for Blind for purchase of water 
cooler and blankets.

•	
Assisted Sri Kanchi Kamakoti Peetam Charitable Trust for 
upgradation of Library.

•	
Helped SERI for mosquito net distribution.

•	
Partnered with Nimbark Math Seva Samiti for distribution 
of clothes to economically weaker section.

•	
Provided winter clothes for tribal students of schools run 
by Donyi Polo Cultural & Charitable Trust (DPCCT) Itanagar, 
Arunachal Pradesh.

•	
Provided Roti maker machine to Bhaorao Deorao Seva 
Nyas AIIMS Jhajjar.

•	
Aided F-tech under project Grassroot Level Action for 
development of Micro Enterprises.

•	
Provided 2-wheel chair for persons with mobility issue to 
The Ganga Foundation.

•	 cksf'k;k xsanksa dh [kjhn ds fy, Hkkjrh; cksf'k;k [ksy egkla?k 
ds lkFk lg;ksx fd;k x;kA

•	 ePNjnkuh forj.k ds fy, SERI dh lgk;rk dh xbZA

----

•	
Support to Nimbark Math Seva Samiti for cloth distribution 
to economically weaker section in West Bengal.

•	
Aided Aprajita Mahila Samiti, Delhi for providing education 
to underprivileged children.

•	
Assisted SERI in organising camp for public health care 
programme initiative.

•	
Collaborated with Delhi Council for Welfare, Palna for 
medicines and daily needs item.

•	
Supported Foundation for Mini Science Centre installation 
in a Delhi Govt. school.

•	
Partnered with NGO CAPED for cervical cancer awareness 
& infrastructural support to orphanage run by N.S. 
Educational Trust on occasion of International Women’s 
day.

•	
Infrastructural support to Delhi Bhajan Samaj Sector 7 
Dwarka Ram Mandir for promoting Indian heritage and 
culture.

•	
Infrastructural support to Air Force base Palam.

**PRINCIPLE 9 Businesses should engage with and provide 
value to their consumers in a responsible manner**

**ESSENTIAL INDICATORS**

**1. 
Describe the mechanisms in place to receive and respond to 
consumer complaints and feedback.**

	
The Bank has an on-line Grievance Redressal Monitoring Portal 
called Centralized Grievance Redressal Monitoring System 
(CGRMS), which is in-house Portal. Through this system, the 
customer gets an immediate acknowledgement and can keep a 
track of the complaint also. Customers can lodge their requests/
complaints in the CGRMS through Bank’s website, Internet 
Banking Service & Mobile Banking Service.

	
The Bank has Primary Contact Centers at Gurugram and  
Noida to provide tele-banking services to its customers on  
24 x 7 x 365 basis through two leading Service Providers. 
In addition to these two Primary Sites, the Bank has also 
established two Secondary Contact Centers at Dehradun and 
Bhopal to provide tele-banking services to its customers. 

	
Bank conducts Customer Satisfaction Surveys on regular basis. 
The findings of the Survey are analyzed, based upon which 
necessary systemic improvements are carried out.

**2. 
Turnover of products and/ services as a percentage of turnover 
from all products/service that carry information about:**

**Particulars
As a percentage to total turnover**

Environmental and social 
parameters relevant to the 
product
Not Applicable
Safe and responsible usage

Recycling and/or safe disposal

••	ok;q lsuk csl ikye dks cqfu;knh <kapkxr lgk;rk çnku dh xbZA

----

**3. 
Number of consumer complaints in respect of the following:**

**The Category of the Grievances are not maintained at the Portal 
in the prescribed Format. However, the disclosure in terms of 
RBI guidelines is as under:**

**Grounds of**

**complaints,  
(i.e. complaints**

**relating to)**

**Number of 
complaints**

**pending 
at the 
beginning**

**of the 
year**

**Number of 
complaints**

**received**

**during the**

**Year**

**% Increase/ 
decrease in 
the number**

**of complaints 
received over**

**the  Previous**

**year**

**Number of 
complaints 
pending at 
the end of 
the Year**

**Of 5,**

**number of**

**complaints**

**pending 
beyond 30**

**days**

1
2
3
4
5
6

**Current Year (FY 2023-24)**

Internet/Mobile/
Electronic Banking
13442
489664
-35.08
12262
457

ATM/Debit Cards
1814
316892
-13.89
5054
38

Account opening/ 
difficulty in 
operation of 
accounts

303
21582
-38.29
458
10

Pension and 
facilities for 
senior citizens/ 
differently abled

106
14532
107.54
225
9

Loans and 
advances
128
8594
37.07
332
14

Others
7392
278931
51.16
14020
1673

**Total
23185
1130195
-16.59
32351
2201**

**Previous Year (FY 2022-23)#^**

Internet/Mobile/
Electronic Banking
19128
754265
-24.50
13442
263

ATM/Debit Cards
6521
367991
-26.64
1814
1

Account opening/ 
difficulty in 
operation of 
accounts

235
34976
3.02
303
3

Pension and 
facilities for 
senior citizens/ 
differently abled

1
7002
147.68
106
0

Loans and 
advances
60
6270
23.57
128
3

Others
4657
184533
-5.74
7392
185

**Total
30602
1355037
-22.05
23185
455**

**#Data regarding number of complaints includes all type of complaints.
^Figures have been regrouped whenever considered necessary as we have 
considered complaints received from both CGRMS and CRM portal**

**4. 
Details of instances of product recalls on account of safety 
issues:**

**Particulars
No.
Reasons for recall**

**Voluntary recalls
Not Applicable
Forced recalls**

**3-	 fuEufyf[kr ds laca/k esa miHkksäk f'kdk;rksa dh la[;k%**

**f'kdk;r dk vkèkkj] 
¼vFkkZr~ lacaf/kr 
f'kdk;rsa½**

**o"kZ ds 
çkjaHk esa 
yafcr 
f'kdk;rksa 
dh la[;k**

**o"kZ ds 
nkSjku çkIr 
f'kdk;rksa 
dh la[;k**

**fiNys o"kZ dh 
rqyuk esa çkIr 
f'kdk;rksa dh 
la[;k esa % 
dh o`f)/deh**

**o"kZ ds 
var esa 
yafcr 
f'kdk;rksa 
dh la[;k**

**30 fnuksa ls 
vf/kd le; 
ls yafcr 
f'kdk;rksa 
dh la[;k 
5 gSA**

1
2
3
4
5
6

**pkyw o"kZ ¼foÙk o"kZ 2023&24½**

**baVjusV@eksckby@
bysDVª‚fud cSafdax**

13442
489664
-35.08
12262
457

,Vh,e@MsfcV dkMZ
1814
316892
-13.89
5054
38

**[kkrk [kksyuk@
[kkrs ds ifjpkyu 
esa dfBukbZ**

303
21582
-38.29
458
10

**ofj"B ukxfjdksa@
fnO;kaxksa ds fy, 
isa'ku ,oa lqfo/kk,a**

106
14532
107.54
225
9

_.k vkSj vfxze
128
8594
37.07
332
14

vU;
7392
278931
51.16
14020
1673

**dqy
23185
1130195
-16.59
32351
2201**

**xr o"kZ ¼foÙk o"kZ 2022&23½#^**

baVjusV/eksckby/
bysDVª‚fud cSafdax

19128
754265
-24.50
13442
263

,Vh,e/MsfcV dkMZ
6521
367991
-26.64
1814
1

[kkrk [kksyuk/[kkrs 
ds ifjpkyu esa 
dfBukbZ

235
34976
3.02
303
3

ofj"B ukxfjdksa/
fnO;kaxksa ds fy, 
isa'ku ,oa lqfo/kk,a

1
7002
147.68
106
0

_.k vkSj vfxze
60
6270
23.57
128
3

vU;
4657
184533
-5.74
7392
185

**dqy
30602
1355037
-22.05
23185
455**

**4-	 lqj{kk eqíksa ds dkj.k mRikn okil eaxk, tkus ds ekeyksa dk 
fooj.k%**

**fooj.k
ugha
okil cqykus ds dkj.k
LoSfPNd fjd‚y 
ykxw ugha
cyiwoZd fjd‚y**

----

**5. 
Does the entity have a framework/ policy on cyber security 
and risks related to data privacy? (Yes/No) If available, provide 
a web-link of the policy.**

	
Bank has a Board approved “Cyber Security Policy”. This 
Cyber Security (CS) Policy has been framed based on 
stipulated RBI guidelines, the Information Technology Act and 
International Standards. It consists of concise and practical 
series of statements, declaring the management’s views and 
position regarding Cyber Security, according to Bank’s specific 
requirements. Availalbe on intranet of the bank.

**6. 
Provide details of any corrective actions taken or 
underway on issues relating to advertising, and delivery 
of essential services; cyber security and data privacy of 
customers; re-occurrence of instances of product recalls; 
penalty/action taken by regulatory authorities on safety of 
products/ services.**

	
Several initiatives have been taken to spread/advertise the 
Cyber security awareness among the Customers as well as 
Bank’s staffs –

1. 	
Cyber awareness creatives are posted on various social 
media platform and bank’s website to spread awareness 
on cyber hygiene among the Bank’s customer.

2. 	
Bank conducts Cyber Jagrookta Diwas on 1st Wednesday 
of each month to spread awareness among the field 
functionaries and customers through posting cyber 
security awareness pages through Active directory on end 
points and on social media platforms.   

3.  	 We also conduct phishing drill for the staffs of the bank on 
periodic basis.  Those staffs who click on the phishing links 
are provided training on Cyber Security.

**7.  
Provide the following information relating to data breaches:**

a.
Number of instances of data breaches 
NIL

b.
Percentage of data breaches involving personally 
identifiable information of customers 
NIL

c.
Impact, if any, of the data breaches
NA

**LEADERSHIP INDICATORS**

**1. 
Channels / platforms where information on products and 
services of the entity can be accessed (provide web link, if 
available).**

	
Corporate Website (www.pnbindia.in), Internet Banking 
Service, Mobile Banking Service & Contact Centers.

**2. 
Steps taken to inform and educate consumers about safe and 
responsible usage of products and/or services.**

	
The information regarding Safe Usage of Bank’s various products 
and services are disseminated to the Customer through various 
Channels such as, Corporate Website (www.pnbindia.in), SMS, 
Internet Banking Services, Mobile Banking Services, Contact 
Centre, Social Media etc.

**7- 	 MsVk mYya?kuksa ls lacaf/kr fuEufyf[kr tkudkjh çnku djsa%**

**,-
MsVk mYya?ku dh ?kVukvksa dh la[;k
'kwU;**

**lh-
MsVk mYya?kuksa dk çHkko] ;fn dksbZ gks]
ykxw ugha**

----

3. 
Mechanisms in place to inform consumers of any risk of 
disruption/discontinuation of essential services. 

	
Dissemination of information regarding outages are done on 
regular basis.

4. 
Does the entity display product information on the product 
over and above what is mandated as per local laws? (Yes/No/
Not Applicable) If yes, provide details in brief. 

	
Not Applicable

5.	
Did your entity carry out any survey with regard to consumer 
satisfaction relating to the major products / services of the 
entity, significant locations of operation of the entity or the 
entity as a whole? (Yes/No)

	
Bank conducts Customer Satisfaction Surveys on regular basis.

3-	
vko';d lsokvksa esa O;o/kku@can gksus ds fdlh Hkh tksf[ke 
ds ckjs esa miHkksäkvksa dks lwfpr djus ds fy, ra= ekStwn 
gksuk pkfg,A

	
lsok ckf/kr gksus ds laca/k esa lwpuk dk çlkj fu;fer vk/kkj ij 
fd;k tkrk gSA

	
ykxw ugha

	
cSad fu;fer vk/kkj ij xzkgd larqf"V losZ{k.k vk;ksftr djrk gS

----

UMMED JAIN & CO.	
51, Snehdhara,

Chartered Accountants	
JeevanVikas Kendra Marg,

	
Andheri (E), Mumbai - 69

	
Ph: 91-22-26827498

	
91-9323600966, 8890033333

	
E-mail: ujc1981@gmail.com

**Independent Practitioners’ Reasonable Assurance Report**

**To the Board of Directors of Punjab National Bank,**

Reasonable Assurance Report on the sustainability disclosures in 
the Business Responsibility and Sustainability Reporting (BRSR) 
Core Format (called ‘Identified Sustainability Information’ (ISI) of 
Punjab National Bank (the ‘Bank’) for the period from 1st April 2023 
to 31st March 2024.The ISI is included in the Business Responsibility 
and Sustainability Reporting of the Bank for the period from  
1st April 2023 to 31st March 2024.

**Opinion**

We have undertaken to perform a reasonable assurance 
engagement for Punjab National Bank vide agreement dated  
20th May 2024 in respect of the agreed Bank’s sustainability 
disclosures listed below (the ‘Identified Sustainability Information’) 
pertaining to BRSR Core (refer to Annexure 1) as notified by SEBI 
Vide Circular Dated 12th July 2023. This Sustainability Information 
is included in BRSR of the bank for the period from 1st April 2023 to  
31st March 2024. This engagement was conducted by a 
multidisciplinary 
team 
including 
assurance 
practitioners, 
environmental and social professionals.

Identified 
Sustainability 
Information (ISI) 
subject to assurance

Period
subject to
assurance

Reporting criteria

BRSR Core  
(refer Annexure 1) 
Notified by SEBI 
Vide circular Number 
SEBI/HO/CFD/
CFD-SEC-2/P/
CIR/2023/122 dated 
12th July, 2023

From 1st 
April,
2023 to 31
March 2024

-	 Regulation 34(2)(f) of the 
Securities and Exchange 
Board 
of 
India 
(SEBI) 
Listing 
Obligations 
and 
Disclosure 
Requirements 
(SEBI LODR)

-	 Guidance notes for BRSR 
format issued by SEBI

-	 World Resource Institute 
(WRI) / World Business 
Council 
for 
Sustainable 
Development 
(WBCSD) 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) 
Protocol 
(A 
Corporate 
Accounting and Reporting 
Standards

-	 Standard on Sustainability 
Assurance 
Engagement 
(SSAE) 3000, “Assurance 
Engagements 
on 

Sustainability Information, 
“issued by the Sustainability 
Reporting Standards Board 
of Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of India.

**mesn tSu ,aM daiuh 	
51] Lusgèkkjk]**

**lunh ys[kkdkj	
thou fodkl dsaæ ekxZ]**

**vaèksjh ¼Ã½] eqacÃ & 69**

**Q+ksu% 91&22&26827498**

**91&9323600966] 8890033333**

	
Ãesy% ujc1981@gmail.com

**çsfDVlujksa dh Lora= mfpr vkÜoklu fjiksVZ**

**funs'kd eaMy] iatkc uS'kuy cSad**

**vfHker**

**&	 lsch }kjk tkjh chvkj,lvkj 
çk:i ds fy, ekxZn'kZu uksV**

----

Our Reasonable assurance engagement was with respect to the 
year ended March 31st, 2024, information only unless otherwise 
stated and we have not performed any procedures with respect to 
earlier periods or any other elements included in the BRSR and, 
therefore, do not express any conclusion thereon.

**Management’s Responsibility for the identified Sustainability 
information**

The Bank’s management is responsible for selecting or establishing 
suitable criteria for preparing the Sustainability Information, 
considering applicable laws and regulations, if any, related to 
reporting on the Sustainability Information, Identification of key 
aspects, engagement with stakeholders, content, preparation, 
and presentation of the Identified Sustainability Information in 
accordance with the Criteria. This responsibility includes design, 
implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to 
the preparation of the BRSR and the measurement of Identified 
Sustainability Information, which is free from material misstatement, 
whether due to fraud or error.

**Inherent limitations**

The absence of a significant body of established practice on which 
to evaluate and measure non-financial information allows for 
different but acceptable measures and measurement techniques 
and can affect comparability between entities.

**Our Independence and Quality Control**

We have maintained our independence and confirm that we have 
met the requirements of the Code of Ethics issued by the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of India and have the required competencies 
and experience to conduct this assurance engagement.

The firm applies Standard on Quality Control (SQC) 1, “Quality 
Control for Firms that Perform Audits and Reviews of Historical 
Financial Information, and Other Assurance and Related Services 
Engagements”, and accordingly maintains a comprehensive system 
of quality control including documented policies and procedures 
regarding compliance with ethical requirements, professional 
standards, and applicable legal and regulatory requirements.

**Our 
Responsibilities 
for 
the 
identified 
Sustainability 
Information (ISI)**

Our responsibility is to express a reasonable assurance conclusion 
on the Identified Sustainability Information based on the procedures 
we have performed and evidence we have obtained. 

We conducted our engagement in accordance with the Standard 
on 
Sustainability 
Assurance 
Engagements 
(SSAE) 
3000, 
“Assurance Engagements on Sustainability Information”, issued 
by the Sustainability Reporting Standards Board of the Institute 
of Chartered Accountants of India. This standard requires that we 
plan and perform our engagement to obtain reasonable assurance 
about whether the Identified Sustainability Information is prepared, 

**fpfàr fLFkjrk lwpuk ds fy, çcaèku dk mÙkjnkf;Ro**

**fpfàr fLFkjrk lwpuk ¼vkÃ,lvkÃ½ ds fy, gekjk mÙkjnkf;Ro**

----

in all material respects, in accordance with the Reporting Criteria. 
A reasonable assurance engagement involves assessing the risks 
of material misstatement of the Identified Sustainability Information 
whether due to fraud or error, responding to the assessed risks as 
necessary in the circumstances. 

The procedures we performed were based on our professional 
judgment and included inquiries, observation of processes 
performed, inspection of documents, evaluating the appropriateness 
of quantification methods and reporting policies, analytical 
procedures and agreeing or reconciling with underlying records. 
Given the circumstances of the engagement, in performing the 
procedures listed above, we: 

1.	
Interviewed relevant personnel of Bank's management 
responsible for Sustainability, Environmental Social 
Governance (ESG) and the bank's consultant and 
their team for understanding the process of collecting, 
collating, and reporting the subject matter as per Global 
Reporting Initiative (GRI) Standards and SEBI circular for 
BRSR core. 

2.	
Checked the consolidation for various branches, offices, 
and other locations (excluding international operations) to 
ensure the completeness of data being reported.

3.	
Relied on the total income from the published audited 
financial 
statements 
for 
turnover 
based 
intensity 
indicators.

4.	
Performed substantive testing on a sample basis of the 
Identified Sustainability Indicators at sample branches, 
offices and other locations covered, to verify that data 
had been appropriately measured with the underlying 
documents recorded, collated, and reported. This 
included assessing records and performing testing 
including recalculation of sample data.

5.	
Assessed the appropriateness of basis used for selecting 
sample branches for extrapolation.

6.	
Assessed the appropriateness of calculations used for 
extrapolation of data for sample branches to arrive at 
estimated annual data. 

7.	
Assessed the appropriateness of various assumptions, 
estimations and materiality thresholds used by the bank 
and its consultant for data analysis.

8.	
Performed analytical procedures to analyze trends 
in the historical data and accordingly ascertain the 
reasonableness of the data reported in the current year.

**Exclusions:**

Our assurance scope excludes the following and therefore we do 
not express a conclusion on the same: 

•	
Operations of the Bank other than those mentioned in the 
“Scope of Assurance”. 

•	
Aspects of the BRSR and the data/information (qualitative or 
quantitative) other than the Identified Sustainability Information. 

----

•	
Data and information outside the defined reporting period i.e. 
1st April 2023 to 31st march, 2024

•	
The statements that describe expression of opinion, belief, 
aspiration, expectation, aim, or future intentions provided by 
the Bank.

Reasonable Assurance Opinion 

Based on the procedures we have performed and the evidence we 
have obtained, the Identified Sustainability Information for the year 
ended 31st March 2024 (as stated under “Identified Sustainability 
Information”) are prepared in all material respects, in accordance 
with the criteria above.

**Restriction on use**

Our Reasonable Assurance report has been prepared and 
addressed to the Board of Directors of Punjab National Bank at the 
request of the Bank solely, to assist Bank in reporting on Bank’s 
sustainability performance and activities. Accordingly, we accept 
no liability to anyone other than the Bank. Our Deliverables should 
not be used for any other purpose or by any person other than 
the addresses of our Deliverables. The firm neither accepts nor 
assumes any duty of care or liability for any other purpose or to 
any other party to whom our Deliverables are shown or into whose 
hands it may come without our prior consent in writing.

For Ummed Jain & Co.
Chartered Accountants
FRN No. 119250W

CA. Akhil Jain
Partner
M. No. 137970
UDIN:24137970BKFJBY4742

**Date: 30/05/2024
Place: Delhi**

**mfpr vkÜoklu vfHker**

**mi;ksx çfrcaèk**

lh-,- vf[ky tSu
Hkkxhnkj 
lnL; la- 137970
;wMhvkÃ,u%24137970BKFJBY4742

**fnukad% 30@05@2024
LFkku% fnYyh**

----

ANNUAL
REPORT

259

**BLANK PAGE**

----

**vuqcaèk 1**

;Fkksfpr

;Fkksfpr

;Fkksfpr

;Fkksfpr

----

**Annexure-1**

**BRSR Core Attributes**

**BRSR Indicator
Type of Assurance**

**Principle 6: Businesses should respect and make efforts to protect and restore the environment.**

**Attribute 1: Green-House Gas (GHG) footprint**

Question 7: Details of Greenhouse Gas Emissions (Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions) & its intensity:

Reasonable

Total Scope 1 Emissions

Total Scope 2 Emissions

Total Scope 1 and Scope 2 Emission Intensity per rupee crore of turnover

Total Scope 1 and Scope 2 Emission Intensity per rupee crore of turnover adjusted for Purchasing Power Parity

Total Scope 1 and Scope 2 Emission Intensity in terms of physical output/any other relevant metric

**Attribute 2: Water Footprint**

Question 3: Details of the following disclosures related to water:

Reasonable

Water withdrawal by source (in kilolitres)

Total volume of water withdrawal (in kilolitres)

Total volume of water consumption (in kilolitres)

Water intensity per rupee crore of turnover (Total water consumption/Revenue from operations)

Water intensity per rupee crore of turnover adjusted for Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)

Water intensity in terms of physical output/any other relevant metric

Question 4: Details related to water discharged:

Water discharge by destination and level of treatment (in kilolitres)

Total water discharged (in kilolitres)

**Attribute 3: Energy Footprint**

Question 1: Details of total Energy Consumption (in joules or multiples) and energy intensity:

Reasonable

Total Energy consumed from Renewable sources

Total Energy consumed from Non-renewable sources

Energy Intensity per rupee crore of turnover (Total energy consume/revenue from operation)

Energy Intensity per rupee Crore of turnover adjusted for Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)

Energy Intensity in terms of physical output/ any other relevant metric 

**Attribute 4: Embracing circularity -Details related to waste management by the entity**

Question 9: Provide details related to waste management by the entity:

Reasonable

Total waste generated (in metric tonnes)

Waste intensity per rupee crore of turnover (total waste generated/revenue from operations)

Waste intensity per rupee crore of turnover adjusted for Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)

Waste intensity in terms of Physical output /any other relevant metric

For each category of waste generated, total waste recovered through recycling, reusing or other recovery 
operations (in metric tonnes)

For each category of waste generated, total waste disposed by nature of disposal method (in metric tonnes)

----

;Fkksfpr

POSH ij efgyk deZpkfj;ksa@dkexkjksa ds çfr'kr ds vuqlkj f'kdk;rsa

POSH ij f'kdk;rsa cjdjkj j[kh xb±@yafcr

;Fkksfpr

----

**BRSR Indicator
Type of Assurance**

**Principle 3: Businesses should respect and promote the Well -being of all Employees, including those in their value chains**

**Attribute 5: Enhancing employee Well-being and Safety**

Question 1 (c): Spending on measures towards Well-being of employees and workers (including permanent and 
other than permanent):  

Reasonable

Cost incurred on wellbeing measures as a %age of total revenue of the company

Question 11: Details of Safety related incidents for employees and workers:

Lost time injury frequency rate (LTIFR) (per one million -person hours worked)

Total recordable work -related injuries

No. of Fatalities

High consequence work - related injury or ill -health (excluding fatalities) 

**Principle 5: Businesses should respect and promote Human Rights**

**Attributes 6: Enabling Gender Diversity in in business**

Question 3 (b): Gross wages paid to females as % of total wages paid by the entity:

Reasonable

Question 7: Complaints field under the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, prohibition, and 
Redressal) Act,2013

Total Complaints reported under Sexual Harassment of Women at workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal) Act, 2013 (POSH)

Complaints on POSH as a % of female employees/workers

Complaints on POSH upheld

**Principle 8: Business should promote inclusive growth and Equitable Development**

**Attribute 7: Enabling Inclusive Development**

Question 4: Percentage of input material (Inputs to total inputs by value) sourced from suppliers: 
a. Directly sourced from MSME’s/small producers.

b: Directly from within India
Reasonable
Question 5: Job creation in smaller towns- Disclose wages paid to persons employed (including employees of 
workers employed on a permanent or non- permanent/ on contract basis) in smaller towns, as % of total wage 
cost

**Principle 9: Businesses should engage with and provide value to their Consumers in a Responsible manner**

**Attribute 8: Fairness in Engaging with Customers and Suppliers**

Question 7: Provide the following information relating to data breaches:

a. Number of instances of data breaches

b. Percentage of data Breaches involving personally identifiable information of customers

c. Impact, if any, of the data breaches

Reasonable

----

fo'ks"krk 9% O;olk; dk [kqykiu

;Fkksfpr

[kjhnkjh dk ladsUæ.k

fcØh dk ladsUæ.k

----

**BRSR Indicator
Type of Assurance**

**Principle 1: Businesses should conduct and govern themselves with Integrity and in a manner that is Ethical,  
Transparent and Accountable**

**Attribute 9: Open-ness of Business**

Question 8: Number of days of Accounts Payable ((Accounts payable *365)/Cost of goods/services procured)

Reasonable

Question 9: Details of concentration of purchases and sales with trading houses, dealers, and related parties 
along with advances &investments, with related parties:

Concentration of Purchases

Concentration of Sales

Shares of RPTs in

a. Purchases (Purchases with related parties/Total Purchases)

b. Sales (Sales to related parties/Total Sales)

c. Loans &Advances (Loans &Advances given to Related Parties/Total loans & Advances)

d. Investments (Investments In Related Parties/ Total Investments Made)

----

266

**BLANK PAGE**

----

**Corporate Social
Responsibility
Report 2023-24**

कॉपɮरेट सामाʁजक
उŨरदाɿयŷ ɼरपोटर् 2023-24

----

lekt dks okil nsuk

vf[ky Hkkjrh; leFkZu

Hkkoh usr`Ro dk fodkl

LokLF; lsok dh igqap dks c<+kuk

I am deeply honoured to present to you the Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) report of Punjab National Bank for the fiscal year 2023-24. At 
Punjab National Bank, we are guided by the fundamental principle of 
"Giving back to society," a commitment ingrained in our ethos. As the 
nation's leading public sector bank, we recognize our responsibility in 
driving positive change and fostering societal development.

Sustainability and initiatives towards the advancement of education, 
sports and healthcare have been integral pillars of our activities in 
FY24. We firmly believe that our contributions to society today shape 
a better tomorrow. With a deep sense of duty towards society, and 
the environment, we strive to fulfil our role as one of the nation's 
largest banks in enriching the lives of individuals and communities.

Giving Back to Society 

Our CSR Policy encompasses various initiatives contributing 
towards different aspects of society. From upgrading educational 
infrastructures to supporting healthcare, and aiding marginalized 
sections, we endeavour to make a positive impact on lives across 
diverse segments of society.

Pan-India Support 

PNB's commitment extends across the length and breadth of the nation, 
reaching communities in need and making a positive impact. Whether 
through relief efforts in Manipur during times of unrest for Internally 
Displaced Persons, support for sports initiatives such as assisting the 
Boccia Sports Federation, aiding the differently abled by extending 
support to NGOs like the National Association for the Blind, we have 
been proactive in providing aid and assistance across the country.

Nurturing Future Leaders 

Recognizing the critical role of education in shaping future generations, 
we have focused on improving educational infrastructure. 
Collaborating with government schools, we have made significant 
contributions towards improving overall environment of educational 
institutions, thereby empowering present and future generations.

Enhancing Healthcare Access 

The Bank takes great pride in its role in fortifying the healthcare 
ecosystem nationwide. In alignment with government initiatives 
aimed at broadening healthcare services' reach, particularly for 
disadvantaged and marginalized communities, we have been 

**okf"kZd lh,lvkj fjiksVZ 2023&24  
ds fy, ,eMh ,oa lhbZvks dk lans'k**

**MD & CEO’s Message for Annual  
CSR Report 2023-24**

----

**dY;k.kdkjh ;kstuk,a vkSj jk"Vªh; igy**

**d‚jiksjsV Lo;alsok**

**vrqy dqekj xks;y 
çcaèk funs'kd ,oa lhbZvks**

proactive in this segment also. Our contributions encompass 
providing ambulance facilities, patient care support, and enhancing 
hygiene standards, alongside conducting awareness campaigns.

In addition to bolstering healthcare initiatives, we have extended 
significant support to marginalized communities, including rural 
women. Recognizing the global severity of cervical cancer, PNB 
is actively working towards raising awareness about this pressing 
issue. Through our concerted efforts, we strive to make meaningful 
contributions to healthcare awareness, accessibility, and inclusivity, 
fostering a healthier and more equitable society.

**Welfare Schemes and National Initiatives**

PNB is running several welfare schemes such as PNB VIKAS- Village 
Adoption Scheme, socio-economic empowerment through setting up 
76 RSETIs (Rural Self Employment Training Institute) & 12 Farmers’ 
Training Centres. During the FY 2023-24, a total of 60,721 persons 
were trained in RSETI centres out of which 47,911 belong to BPL 
Families and 47,899 were women. 

Promoting our National Game Hockey has also been a key area of 
focus for the bank. It gives me immense pleasure to share that during 
the fiscal year, four players from our senior hockey team proudly 
represented our nation in prestigious international tournaments such 
as the Asian Games, Men’s Asian Champions Trophy, Men’s Hockey 
World Cup, and Commonwealth Games in Birmingham.

**Corporate Volunteering**

The underlying message of our CSR activities is whatever we do today, 
will have an impact on future generations. We have been undertaking 
CSR activities with full participation of staff members and the local 
populace. The one lakh plus employees of the Bank planted minimum 
2 saplings under the project ‘PALAASH’ across the country.

We also acknowledge the efforts of PNB PRERNA, an association 
comprising of senior women officials of the bank and the wives of 
senior bank officials, who have been voluntarily involved in carrying 
forward these CSR efforts of the Bank. 

The Bank considers Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) as 
a commitment to operate in an economically, socially and 
environmentally 
sustainable 
manner, 
while 
simultaneously 
recognizing the interests of its stakeholders. At the heart of this 
strategy, lies our bank’s unwavering commitment to creating 
and sustaining vibrant communities. Through our investment in 
institutions and programs to support and enhance community 
development in a sustainable fashion, our commitment to CSR is 
amply recognized and lauded.  

The Bank believes in growing responsibly, forging deeper relationships, and 
engaging meaningfully with all our stakeholders. Going forward, we will 
continue to support the society through active participation in programs 
aimed at creating a better society. We will also continue to conduct 
business in a sensitive and responsible manner. In the end, I want to 
express my sincere thanks to all our partners & members of PNB Parivaar 
for their whole hearted participation in CSR activities during FY23-24. 

Atul Kumar Goel 
Managing Director & CEO 

----

**d‚jiksjsV lkekftd mÙkjnkf;Ro fjiksVZ 2023&24**

2-1 gfjr igy vkSj LFkkf;Ro 

3-	 vapy vkSj eaMy Lrj ij tkx:drk dk;ZØe@vk;kstu 

4-	 o`{kkjksi.k vfHk;ku

5-	 fMftVy fjd‚MZ j[kus ds fy, ra=

6-	 xzhu çkstsDV Qkbusaflax vkSj bysfDVªd okgu foÙkiks"k.k dks c<+kok nsuk

7-	 fu;fer vkèkkj ij fjlkbfDyax f'kfojksa dk vk;kstu

9-	 cSad ds lHkh dk;kZy;ksa esa ÅtkZ laj{k.k vksyafid dh 'kq#vkr

**Corporate Social Responsibility Report  2023-24**

**Punjab 
National 
Bank’s 
Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility Approach**

1.	 At Punjab National Bank, Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) is a commitment to operate in an economically, 
socially and environmentally sustainable manner. The 
Bank recognises the priorities of its stakeholders such as 
investors, customers, employees, business partners, local 
communities, and society at large, and aims to enhance 
the society’s quality of life. At the heart of this strategy is 
the Bank’s unwavering commitment to nurturing vibrant 
communities. This commitment comes to life through the 
Bank’s support in institutions and programmes that promote 
sustainable community development. During FY 2023-24, 
the Bank’s CSR activities were focussed towards improving 
education, health, skill empowerment programmes for the 
public, as well as social welfare activities on a Pan India 
basis through its field offices.

2.	 The Bank makes following commitments as a part of its 
CSR strategy:

2.1	Green Initiatives & Sustainability 

PNB as an organisation is committed to environmental 
sustainability and is taking proactive steps to reduce its carbon 
footprint. The following steps undertaken are examples of the 
Bank's commitment towards a more sustainable future. PNB 
is also determined to take a major leap by making policy level 
changes and aims at adopting more sustainable processes as 
under:

1.	 Introducing 
digital 
processes 
for 
better 
efficiency, 
accessibility, seamless communication, and enhanced 
customer experience

2.	 Encouraging digital movement of notes/communications 
within offices and reducing carbon emissions

3.	 Awareness programmes/events at Zonal & Circle level

4.	 Tree Plantation drive

5.	 Mechanism for digital record keeping

6.	 Promoting Green Project Financing & Electric Vehicle Financing

7.	 Holding of Recycling camps on regular basis

8.	 Setting up of Cycle parking zones & Electric Vehicle charging 
stations at designated offices

9.	 Introduction of Energy Conservation Olympics across all 
offices of the bank

----

2-2	LokLF;

MD & CEO Shri Atul Kumar Goel in a tree plantation drive at Head office, Dwarka

Sh. Atul Kumar Goel, MD & CEO handed over ventilators and ICU beds to Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan, Bhubaneshwar, for upgrading 
health infrastructure

2.2	Health

As part of its commitment to ensuring that everyone may access 
healthcare when needed, PNB has made major contributions 
towards improving hospital access for underprivileged patients 
as well as supporting hospital infrastructure upgrades. 

----

On the eve of the Bank's 129th Foundation Day, MD & CEO, Shri Atul Kumar Goel, along with Executive Directors Shri Kalyan 
Kumar and Shri Binod Kumar, boosted the morale of the staff at a blood donation camp organised for staff members at the Head 
Office, Dwarka. Similar camps were organised across all the zones throughout the year to raise awareness about blood donation. 

MD & CEO, Shri Atul Kumar Goel, along with PNB Prerna's President, Smt. Poonam Goel, provided an ambulance to the temple 
committee for the service of devotees visiting the Jagannath Temple in Puri.

----

During the visit to Ahmedabad Zone, ED Shri Kalyan Kumar presented a 'Cart with Stretcher' to the government hospital.

Executive Directors, Shri Binod Kumar and Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, provided an e-rickshaw to the Jagannath Temple for the 
convenience of devotees through the Bhubaneswar zonal office in Odisha.

----

**2-3	f'k{kk igy**

Pic 1: ZO Amritsar provided ambulance at Jalandhar to Shree 
Devi Talab Charitable Trust Hospital

Pic 2: ZO Chennai handed over Ambulance to SRIHER Trust 
for upgrading health infrastructure

MD & CEO Shri Atul Kumar Goel provided Rs 5 Lakhs to Goa Special School Association in the presence of Hon'ble Chief Minister 
of Goa for school infrastructure essentials

2.3	Education Initiatives

During the fiscal year 2023-24, the bank initiated a CSR project 
aimed at advancing education and enhancing educational 
infrastructure within the community. This commitment reflects the 
bank's dedication to nurturing a brighter future for the younger 
generation. By investing in educational programs and initiatives, 
the bank aims to contribute to sustainable development and 
empower children and youth with essential knowledge and skills.

----

Contribution of School uniforms and stationery items to Mata Kalsan Memorial Public School by CO Jalandhar in the presence of 
Zonal Head Amritsar

Some of the contributions included donation of school uniforms 
and stationery items to Mata Kalsan Memorial Public School by 
PNB Circle Office, Jalandhar.

Staff from Circle Office Hamirpur in a CSR event handing over Desk Kits to school students in Hamirpur District of Shimla

----

PNB provided 100 ceiling fans to Bhai Kanhaiya Educational Institute, Village Moriwala, Sirsa

PNB provided water purifiers and RO systems to Modi Nimn Buniyade Vidyalaya.

----

CSR initiative with Herald Public School in Uttarakhand, wherein the school received computers and school supplies

2-4	d‚jiksjsV Lo;alsok

2.4	Corporate Volunteering

“Giving back to the society” is the prime motive behind the 
Bank’s CSR activities. The message that the Bank wants to 
give to its staff regarding CSR is that “whatever we do today, will 
have an impact on future generations”. Thus, the CSR activities 
undertaken at the Bank involves the active participation of its 
staff members and the local populace. During this year, more 
than 1 lakh employees planted two saplings across the country.

All the staff members participated in the cleanliness drive organized at Circle Office, Malda

----

**2-5	[ksyksa dks c<+kok**

**1
18@05@2023&
28@05@2023
12oka y{eh vEey 
eseksfj;y g‚dh VwukZesaV
rhljk LFkku**

**2
24@08@2023& 
03@09@2023
94oka vf[ky Hkkjrh; 
,elhlh&eq#xIik xksYM 
di g‚dh VwukZesaV**

**lsehQkbufyLV**

**2.5	
Promotion of Sports**

The Bank is continuously promoting the National Sport Hockey. 
Since its inception in April 2004, the bank's Senior Hockey team 
has grown to encompass 23 players, all of whom are employees 
of the bank.

The Bank provides all logistics support and infrastructure 
facilities to the players for developing professional skills. 
Senior Hockey team players are provided with playing kit, diet 
allowance, coach, dietician, physiotherapist’s services, astro 
turf ground, etc.

During the FY 2023-24, the total amount invested on Senior 
Hockey Team and coach fee was Rs. 46.43 lakh. 

Performance Highlights and details of Hockey tournaments in 
which PNB team participated and its achievements during the 
review period are as below:

**S. No.
Date of Tournament Tournaments/
championships
PNB Hockey 
team Position**

1
18/05/2023-
28/05/2023
12th Lakshmi 
Ammal Memorial 
Hockey Tournament

3rd Place 

2
24/08/2023-
03/09/2023
94th all India 
MCC-Murugappa 
Gold Cup Hockey 
Tournament

Semi-
Finalist

Four players of the PNB Hockey Team - Mr. Shamsher Singh, 
Mr. Mandeep Mor, Mr. Abhishek, and Mr. Sukhjeet Singh - 
represented the Indian National Hockey Team during FY23-24. 

**ih,uch iyk'k vfHk;ku ds rgr ns'k Hkj ds deZpkfj;ksa us ikSèks yxk,A**

Employees across the nation planted saplings as part of the PNB Palaash campaign.

----

Three players were part of the Indian Hockey contingent which 
represented India at Hockey World Cup 2023. In Asian Games 
2022 held in Hangzhou, China, three of the players were part of 
Gold Medal winning Indian Men’s Hockey Team.

Nine players from PNB Hockey Team at some points of time 
have represented Indian Senior & Junior Men’s Hockey Team. 
Glimpse of the PNB Hockey team’s participation during the 
review period are as under: 

PNB Hockey Team was placed as a Semi Finalist at 94th all India MCC-Murugappa Gold Cup Hockey Tournament 2023

**2-6	lkekftd fuos'k**

2.6	Social Investments

Being a socially responsible organisation, the Bank contributes 
to the society through Farmers Training Centers & Rural Self 
Employment & Training Institutes, Financial Literacy & Credit 
Counselling Centres, PNB Prerna and other initiatives. The 
Bank helps the underprivileged communities to overcome 
unemployment and poverty and shape their own future through 
education and skill development programmes. All these 
initiatives are considered as social investment.

Farmers’ Training Centres (FTCs):  The Bank has established 
12 Farmers’ Training Centres which comes under the ambit 
of PNB Farmers Welfare Trust. The centres provide free of 
cost training on agriculture & allied activities, computers, 
tailoring/embroidery, and other entrepreneurship development 
programmes. Since inception, FTCs has imparted training to 
18,28,024 people through 61,555 training programmes as 
of 31st March 2024. These training centres have been also 
equipped with a mobile van having soil testing facilities at the 
farmers’ fields and LED for audio visual display of informative 
video clips to the farmers. The Bank spent Rs.446.62 Lakhs 
under this initiative during FY 2023-24. 

----

**fooj.k fuEukuqlkj gS%**

**foÙkh; o"kZ
dk;ZØeksa dh la[;k
çf'k{kqvksa dh la[;k**

**2023&24
3156
96313**

The detail is as under: 

Financial Year
No. of Programmes
No. of Trainees

2023-24
3156
96313
 
Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs): There are 76 
RSETIs (under the aegis of MoRD) and 2 Rural Development 
Centres (PNB initiatives) operating in India that are engaged in 
providing training to rural population and their families for skill 
upgradation to undertake self-employment ventures. 60,721 
people were trained in these centres during the FY 2023-24, 
out of which 47,911 belonged to BPL families and 47,899 were 
women.

Since its inception, RSETIs has trained 6,02,566 people, out of 
which 4,04,491 were women and 1,90,592 were SC category 
and 36,568 were ST category.

Impact of RSETIs in Self-Employment: 3,94,855 people got self-
employed after getting training from these institutions. Total 
expenditure during the review year FY23-24 was Rs. 3857.36 
Lakhs.

Provided training programme under BC Sakhi Mission at RSETI Dibrugarh

----

2-7	
vU; lh,lvkj igysa

PNB VIKAS YOJANA: Bank has a scheme titled PNB VIKAS 
YOJANA under which 307 villages have been adopted for their 
holistic development through various welfare/developmental 
activities. 

2.7	Other CSR Initiatives

A.	 PNB Prerna, an association of the spouses of the senior 
officials of the Bank as well as senior lady officials of the 
Bank, have been performing a vital role in undertaking/
promoting the Bank’s CSR activities. The prime objective 
of the Association is to support the Corporate Social 
Responsibility initiatives of the Bank.

To empower women, tailoring workshop was conducted at RSETI Mohali

Smt. Poonam Goel, President PNB Prerna, Smt. Sadhana Kumari, & Smt. Gouri Singh Vice Presidents PNB Prerna, provided 
infrastructural support to National Association for the Blind

----

B.	 lh,lvkj ds rgr vU; dY;k.kdkjh xfrfofèk;ka
B.	 Other Welfare activities under CSR

Smt. Poonam Goel, President PNB Prerna, Smt. Sadhana Kumari, Smt. Gouri Singh & Smt. Anita Mahapatra, Vice Presidents PNB 
Prerna, provided support to CAPED foundation for Cervical Cancer Awareness

Circle Office Srinagar provided 1 Golf Cart and 2 passenger autos to Indian Army’s Badami Bagh Cantonment, Srinagar

----

ZO Amritsar handed over 200 public seating chairs at Attari border Amritsar 

PNB helping internally displaced people in Manipur by providing various essential items in relief camps

----

ih,uch us [ksy midj.k çnku djds cksfPp;k QsMjs'ku dk lg;ksx fd;k

PNB supported BOCCIA Federation by providing sports equipment

ZO Chandigarh provided roti maker machine to AIIMS Jhajjar for the benefit of patients

----

ZO Ahmedabad provided essential furniture supplies to the orphanage, Shishu Gruh

ZO Jaipur provided computers & printers to Yogada Satsang Society of India, Jaipur. The society works around raising awareness 
on mental health and leading a balanced life through Yoga and Meditation

----

ZO Delhi distributed blankets for underprivileged people with the Sewa Bharti Institute, Delhi 

ZO Ahmedabad provided a public drinking water facility at the Nagar Devi Shri Bhadrakali Mataji Mandir  

----

287

vapy dk;kZy; dksydkrk us jke—".k 'kkjnk vkJe] variqj esa xjhc vkSj oafpr yksxksa dks dacy forfjr fd;k  

ZO Kolkata distributed blankets to the poor and underprivileged people at the Ramakrishna Sarada Asharam, Antpur

----

**Pillar-3 
Disclosures 
under 
Basel 
III 
for 
31.03.2024 
Pillar-3 
Disclosures 
under 
Basel 
III 
for 
31.03.2024 
Pillar-3 
Disclosures 
under 
Basel 
III 
for 
31.03.2024 
Pillar-3 
Disclosures 
under 
Basel 
III 
for 
31.03.2024 
Pillar-3 
Disclosures 
under 
Basel 
III 
for 
31.03.2024 
Pillar-3 
Disclosures 
under 
Basel 
III 
for 
31.03.2024 
Pillar-3 
Disclosures 
under 
Basel 
III 
for 
31.03.2024 
Pillar-3 
Disclosures 
under 
Basel 
III 
for 
31.03.2024 
Pillar-3 
Disclosures 
under 
Basel 
III 
for 
31.03.2024 
Pillar-3 
Disclosures 
under 
Basel 
III 
for 
31.03.2024 
Pillar-3 
Disclosures 
under 
Basel 
III 
for 
31.03.2024**

**(CONSOLIDATED)
(CONSOLIDATED)**

Pillar 3 Disclosures under Basel III (Consolidated Basis and 
 3 Disclosures under Basel III (Consolidated Basis and 
 3 Disclosures under Basel III (Consolidated Basis and 
 3 Disclosures under Basel III (Consolidated Basis and 
 3 Disclosures under Basel III (Consolidated Basis and 
 3 Disclosures under Basel III (Consolidated Basis and 
Pillar 3 Disclosures under Basel III (Consolidated Basis and 
Pillar
Important Ratios I.e. Capital, NPA and Industry Wise Exposure 
Important Ratios I.e. Capital, NPA and Industry Wise Exposure 
Important Ratios I.e. Capital, NPA and Industry Wise Exposure 
Important Ratios I.e. Capital, NPA and Industry Wise Exposure 
Important Ratios I.e. Capital, NPA and Industry Wise Exposure 
Important Ratios I.e. Capital, NPA and Industry Wise Exposure 
on Solo Basis) Framework for the Year ended March 31, 2024 as 
on Solo Basis) Framework for the Year ended March 31, 2024 as 
on Solo Basis) Framework for the Year ended March 31, 2024 as 
on Solo Basis) Framework for the Year ended March 31, 2024 as 
on Solo Basis) Framework for the Year ended March 31, 2024 as 
on Solo Basis) Framework for the Year ended March 31, 2024 as 
on Solo Basis) Framework for the Year ended March 31, 2024 as 
per guidelines of RBI have been disclosed separately on Bank’s 
per guidelines of RBI have been disclosed separately on Bank’s 
per guidelines of RBI have been disclosed separately on Bank’s 
per guidelines of RBI have been disclosed separately on Bank’s 
per guidelines of RBI have been disclosed separately on Bank’s 
per guidelines of RBI have been disclosed separately on Bank’s 
per guidelines of RBI have been disclosed separately on Bank’s 
per guidelines of RBI have been disclosed separately on Bank’s 
per guidelines of RBI have been disclosed separately on Bank’s 
website. For details, please visit our website: www.pnbindia.in > 
website. For details, please visit our website: www.pnbindia.in > 
website. For details, please visit our website: www.pnbindia.in > 
website. For details, please visit our website: www.pnbindia.in > 
website. For details, please visit our website: www.pnbindia.in > 
website. For details, please visit our website: www.pnbindia.in > 
website. For details, please visit our website: www.pnbindia.in > 
Regulatory Disclosures > Basel III Disclosures > Financial year 
Regulatory Disclosures > Basel III Disclosures > Financial year 
Regulatory Disclosures > Basel III Disclosures > Financial year 
Regulatory Disclosures > Basel III Disclosures > Financial year 
Regulatory Disclosures > Basel III Disclosures > Financial year 
Regulatory Disclosures > Basel III Disclosures > Financial year 
Regulatory Disclosures > Basel III Disclosures > Financial year 
2023-2024 
2023-2024 

**The section contains following disclosures:-
The section contains following disclosures:-
The section contains following disclosures:-
The section contains following disclosures:-
The section contains following disclosures:-**

**Sl. No.
Tables
Sl. No.
Tables
Particulars**

1.
Table DF - 1 
1.
Table DF - 1 
1.
Table DF - 1 
1.
Table DF - 1 
Scope of Application

2.
Table DF - 2
2.
Table DF - 2
Capital Adequacy

3.
Table DF - 3 
Credit Risk: General Disclosures
3.
Table DF - 3 
Credit Risk: General Disclosures
3.
Table DF - 3 
Credit Risk: General Disclosures

4.
Table DF - 4
Credit Risk: Disclosures for Portfolios 
4.
Table DF - 4
Credit Risk: Disclosures for Portfolios 
4.
Table DF - 4
Credit Risk: Disclosures for Portfolios 
Subject to the Standardised Approach

5.
Table DF - 5
Credit Risk Mitigation: Disclosures for 
5.
Table DF - 5
Credit Risk Mitigation: Disclosures for 
5.
Table DF - 5
Credit Risk Mitigation: Disclosures for 
Standardised Approach

6.
Table DF - 6
Securitisation: Disclosure for 
6.
Table DF - 6
Securitisation: Disclosure for 
6.
Table DF - 6
Securitisation: Disclosure for 
Standardised Approach

7.
Table DF - 7
Market Risk in Trading Book
7.
Table DF - 7
Market Risk in Trading Book
7.
Table DF - 7
Market Risk in Trading Book

8.
Table DF - 8
Operational Risk
8.
Table DF - 8
Operational Risk
8.
Table DF - 8
Operational Risk

9.
Table DF - 9 
Interest Rate Risk in the Banking 
9.
Table DF - 9 
Interest Rate Risk in the Banking 
9.
Table DF - 9 
Interest Rate Risk in the Banking 
Book (IRRBB)

10.
Table DF - 10
General Disclosure for Exposures 
10.
Table DF - 10
General Disclosure for Exposures 
10.
Table DF - 10
General Disclosure for Exposures 
Related to Counterparty Credit Risk

11.
Table DF - 11
Composition of Capital
Table DF - 11
Composition of Capital

12.
Table DF - 12
Composition of Capital – 
12.
Table DF - 12
Composition of Capital – 
12.
Table DF - 12
Composition of Capital – 
Reconciliation Requirements

13.
Table DF - 13
Main features of Regulatory Capital 
13.
Table DF - 13
Main features of Regulatory Capital 
13.
Table DF - 13
Main features of Regulatory Capital 
Instruments

14.
Table DF - 14
Full Terms and Conditions of 
14.
Table DF - 14
Full Terms and Conditions of 
14.
Table DF - 14
Full Terms and Conditions of 
14.
Table DF - 14
Full Terms and Conditions of 
Regulatory Capital Instruments.
Regulatory Capital Instruments.

15.
Table DF - 15
Disclosure Requirements for 
15.
Table DF - 15
Disclosure Requirements for 
15.
Table DF - 15
Disclosure Requirements for 
15.
Table DF - 15
Disclosure Requirements for 
15.
Table DF - 15
Disclosure Requirements for 
15.
Table DF - 15
Disclosure Requirements for 
Remuneration
Remuneration

16.
Table DF - 16
Equities – Disclosures for Banking 
16.
Table DF - 16
Equities – Disclosures for Banking 
16.
Table DF - 16
Equities – Disclosures for Banking 
16.
Table DF - 16
Equities – Disclosures for Banking 
16.
Table DF - 16
Equities – Disclosures for Banking 
16.
Table DF - 16
Equities – Disclosures for Banking 
16.
Table DF - 16
Equities – Disclosures for Banking 
Book Positions

17.
Table DF - 17
Summary Comparison of Accounting 
17.
Table DF - 17
Summary Comparison of Accounting 
17.
Table DF - 17
Summary Comparison of Accounting 
17.
Table DF - 17
Summary Comparison of Accounting 
17.
Table DF - 17
Summary Comparison of Accounting 
17.
Table DF - 17
Summary Comparison of Accounting 
Assets vs Leverage Ratio Exposure 
Measure

18.
Table DF - 18
Leverage Ratio Common Disclosure 
18.
Table DF - 18
Leverage Ratio Common Disclosure 
18.
Table DF - 18
Leverage Ratio Common Disclosure 
18.
Table DF - 18
Leverage Ratio Common Disclosure 
18.
Table DF - 18
Leverage Ratio Common Disclosure 
18.
Table DF - 18
Leverage Ratio Common Disclosure 
Template

**çdVhdj.k**

> Regulatory Disclosures > Basel III Disclosures > Financial year 
> Regulatory Disclosures > Basel III Disclosures > Financial year 
> Regulatory Disclosures > Basel III Disclosures > Financial year 

**Ø-l-
rkfydk,a
Ø-l-
rkfydk,a
fooj.k**

1-
rkfydk 
1-
rkfydk DF - 1
ç;ksT;rk dk nk;jk 

2-
rkfydk 
2-
rkfydk DF - 2
iwath i;kZIrrk

3-
rkfydk 
3-
rkfydk DF - 3
_.k tksf[ke% lkekU; çdVhdj.k 

4-
rkfydk 
4-
rkfydk DF - 4
_.k tksf[ke% ekud –f"Vdks.k ds vèkhu 
iksVZQksfy;ks gsrq çdVhdj.k  

5-
rkfydk 
5-
rkfydk DF - 5
_.k tksf[ke U;wuhdj.k % & ekud 
–f’Vdks.k gsrq çdVhdj.k  

6-
rkfydk 
6-
rkfydk DF - 6
çfrHkwfrdj.k% ekud –f’Vdks.k ds fy, 
çdVhdj.k 

7-
rkfydk 
7-
rkfydk DF - 7
VªsÇMx cgh esa cktkj tksf[ke 

8-
rkfydk 
8-
rkfydk DF - 8
ifjpkyuxr tksf[ke

9-
rkfydk 
9-
rkfydk DF - 9
cSaÇdx cgh esa C;kt nj tksf[ke 
¼vkÃvkjvkjchch½

11-
rkfydk 
11-
rkfydk DF - 11
iwath dh lajpuk 
iwath dh lajpuk 

13-
rkfydk 
13-
rkfydk 
13-
rkfydk 
13-
rkfydk 
13-
rkfydk DF - 13
fofu;ked iwath fy[krksa dh eq[; 
fofu;ked iwath fy[krksa dh eq[; 
fofu;ked iwath fy[krksa dh eq[; 
fo'ks"krk,a
fo'ks"krk,a

----

ANNUAL
REPORT

**Standalone
Financial
Statements**

एकल ɾवŨीय
ɾववरʂणयां

----

**INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT**

To the Members of Punjab National Bank 

Report on Audit of the Standalone Financial Statements

**Opinion**

1.	
We have audited the accompanying Standalone Financial 
Statements of Punjab National Bank (the Bank), which 
comprise the Balance Sheet as at 31 March 2024, the Profit 
and Loss Account and the Statement of Cash Flows for the 
year then ended, and notes to financial statements including 
a summary of significant accounting policies and other 
explanatory information in which are included the returns for 
the year ended on that date of the Central Office, 22 Zonal 
Offices and 

i.	
20 branches, Treasury division, Credit Card division and 
37 other offices audited by us. 

ii.	
1629 Indian branches and other offices audited by 
statutory branch auditors.

iii.	
1 foreign branch audited by local auditors. 

iv.	
1 International Banking Unit situated at Gujarat 
International Finance Tec-City (Gift City) audited by 
Statutory Branch Auditors.

	
The branches audited by us and those audited by other 
auditors have been selected by the Bank in accordance with 
the guidelines issued to the Bank by the Reserve Bank of 
India. Also incorporated in the Balance Sheet, the Profit and 
Loss Account and the Statement of Cash Flows are the returns 
from 9638 branches which have not been subjected to audit. 
These unaudited branches account for 26.68% of advances, 
66.60 % of deposits, 20.53% of interest income and 60.27% of 
interest expenses.

2.	
In our opinion and to the best of our information and according 
to the explanations given to us, the aforesaid standalone 
financial statements give the information required by the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 in the manner so required for 
bank and are in conformity with accounting principles generally 
accepted in India and:

a.	
the Balance Sheet, read with the notes thereon is a full 
and fair Balance Sheet containing all the necessary 
particulars, is properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true 
and fair view of the state of affairs of the Bank as at 31 
March, 2024;

b.	
the Profit and Loss Account, read with the notes thereon 
shows a true balance of profit and

c.	
the Cash Flow Statement gives a true and fair view of the 
cash flows for the year ended on that date.

**ys[kkijh{kdksa dh Lora= fjiksVZ**

**iatkc uS'kuy cSad ds lnL;ksa ds fy,**

**,dy foÙkh; foojf.k;ksa dh ys[kk&ijh{kk ij fjiksVZ**

**vfHker**

iii-	 LFkkuh; ys[kk ijh{kdksa }kjk 1 fons'kh 'kk[kk dh ys[kk ijh{kk dh 
xÃA

----

**Basis for Opinion**

3.	
We conducted our audit in accordance with the Standards 
on Auditing (SAs) issued by the ICAI. Our responsibilities 
under those Standards are further described in the Auditor’s 
Responsibilities for the Audit of the standalone Financial 
Statements section of our report. We are independent of the 
Bank in accordance with the Code of Ethics issued by the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India together with ethical 
requirements that are relevant to our audit of the Standalone 
financial statements and we have fulfilled our other ethical 
responsibilities in accordance with these requirements and the 
Code of Ethics. We believe that the audit evidence we have 
obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our 
opinion.

**Key Audit Matters**

4.	
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional 
judgment, were of most significance in our audit of the 
standalone financial statements for the year ended 31 March 
2024. These matters were addressed in the context of our 
audit of the standalone financial statements as a whole, 
and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a 
separate opinion on these matters. We have determined the 
matters prescribed below to be the key audit matters to be 
communicated in our report.

Key Audit Matters
How our matter was addressed 
in the audit

Advances – classification and 
provisioning

(Refer Schedule 9 to the Standalone 
Financial Statements, read with the 
Accounting Policy No 5)

The advances are classified as 
performing 
and 
non-performing 
advances (NPA) and provisioning 
thereon is made in accordance with 
the prudential norms as prescribed 
by the Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI). The Bank has implemented 
complete system driven recognition 
of advances and their classification 
in SASCL Application under Core 
Banking Solution (CBS). The extent 
of provisioning of NPA under the 
prudential norms are mainly based 
on its ageing and recoverability of 
the underlined security. The same 
are also reviewed manually based 
on necessity.

Our 
audit 
approach 
included 
an understanding of the Bank’s 
software, circulars, guidelines and 
directives of the Reserve Bank 
of India and the Bank’s internal 
instructions and procedures in 
respect of the assets classification 
and its provisioning and adopted 
the following audit procedures:

•	 Evaluated and understood the 
Bank’s internal control system 
in adhering to the Relevant RBI 
guidelines 
regarding 
income 
recognition, asset classification 
and provisioning pertaining to 
advances.

•	 Test checked the design and 
implementation 
as 
well 
as 
operational 
effectiveness 
of 
relevant internal controls and 
substantive testing, including 
involvement 
of 
manual 
process in relation to income 
recognition, asset classification 
and provisioning pertaining to 
advances.

**vfHker dk vkèkkj**

**eq[; ys[kk ijh{kk ekeys**

**eq[; ys[kk ijh{kk ekeys
ys[kk&ijh{kk esa gekjs ekeys dks fdl 
çdkj ls n'kkZ;k x;k gS**

----

In the event of any improper 
application of the prudential norms 
or consideration of the incorrect 
value of the security, as the valuation 
of the security involves high degree 
of estimation and judgement, the 
carrying value of the advances 
could 
be 
materially 
misstated 
either individually or collectively, 
and in view of the significance of 
the amount of advances in the 
Standalone Financial Statements 
the classification of the advances 
and provisioning thereon has been 
considered as Key Audit Matter in 
our audit.

•	 Reviewed the Bank’s monitoring 
mechanisms to identify errors 
and 
omission 
in 
applying/ 
implementation of logic / data 
integrity and its corrective action.

•	 Reviewed the documentations, 
operations / performance and 
monitoring 
of 
the 
advance 
accounts, 
on 
as 
per 
RBI 
guidelines basis of the large and 
stressed advances, to ascertain 
any 
overdue, 
unsatisfactory 
conduct or weakness in any 
advance account, examination 
of classification as per prudential 
norms of the RBI, in respect of 
the branches / relevant divisions 
audited by us. In respect of the 
branches audited by the branch 
statutory 
auditors, 
we 
have 
placed reliance on their reports. 

•	 Reviewed 
the 
report 
of 
independent 
IT 
Expert 
on 
review of SASCL Application 
(Income Recognition and Asset 
Classification 
solution) 
used 
by CBS including the review of 
“Baseline Requirements for the 
NPA classification Solution”.

•	 Reviewed on test check basis 
the reports of the credit audit, 
inspection audit, risk based 
internal audit, concurrent audit, 
regulatory audit to ascertain the 
advances having any adverse 
features 
/ 
comments, 
and 
reviewed the reports generated 
from the Bank’s system.

**Our Results:**

The results of our audit process 
were observed to be adequate 
and satisfactory considering the 
materiality of the transactions.

**Investments – valuation, and 
identification and provisioning 
for Non-Performing Investments**

(Refer Schedule 8 to the Standalone 
Financial Statements, read with the 
Accounting Policy No 4)

Investment portfolio of the bank 
comprises 
of 
Investments 
in 
Government 
Securities, 
Bonds, 
Debentures, 
Shares, 
Security 
Receipts 
and 
other 
Approved 
Securities 
which 
are 
classified 
under three categories, Held to 
Maturity, Available for Sale and Held 
for Trade. 

Our 
audit 
approach 
towards 
Investments 
with 
reference 
to 
the RBI circulars / directives 
included the review and testing 
of the design, implementation, 
operating effectiveness of internal 
controls and audit procedures in 
relation to valuation, classification, 
identification of Non-Performing 
Investments, 
provisioning 
/ 
depreciation related to Investments 
as per RBI guidelines.

•	 We reviewed and evaluated the 
process adopted for collection of 
information from various sources 
for determining fair value of 
these investments.

**gekjk ifj.kke% 
ysunsu ds egRo dks ns[krs gq, gekjh 
ys[kk ijh{kk çfØ;k ds ifj.kke mfpr vkSj 
larks"ktud ik, x,A**

----

Valuation 
of 
Investments, 
identification of Non performing 
Investments 
(NPI) 
and 
the 
corresponding 
non-recognition 
of income and provision thereon, 
is carried out in accordance with 
the relevant circulars / guidelines / 
directions of RBI. The valuation of 
each category (type) of aforesaid 
security is to be carried out as per the 
methodology prescribed in circulars 
and directives issued by the RBI 
which involves collection of data/ 
information from various sources 
such as FBIL rates, rates quoted 
on BSE/NSE, financial statements 
of unlisted companies, NAV in case 
of mutual funds & security receipts 
etc. Certain investments are based 
on the valuation methodologies 
that include statistical models with 
inherent assumptions, assessment 
of price for valuation based on 
financial statements etc. Hence, the 
price discovered for the valuation 
of these Investments may not be 
the true representative but only a 
fair assessment of the Investments 
as on date. Hence the valuation 
of Investments requires special 
attention and further in view of 
the significance of the amount 
of Investments in the financial 
statements the same has been 
considered as Key Audit Matter in 
our audit.

•	 For 
selected 
sample 
of 
investments 
(covering 
all 
categories of investments based 
on nature of security) we tested 
accuracy and compliance with 
the RBI Master Circulars and 
directions. 

•	 We assessed and evaluated the 
process of identification of NPIs, 
and corresponding reversal of 
income and creation of provision.

**Our Results:**

The results of our audit process 
were observed to be adequate 
and satisfactory considering the 
materiality.

**Assessment 
of 
Information 
Technology (IT):**

IT controls with respect to recording 
of transactions, generating various 
reports in compliance with RBI 
guidelines.

Other compliances to regulators 
etc., is an important part of the 
process. Such reporting is highly 
dependent on the effective working 
of Core Banking Software and other 
allied systems.

We have considered this as key 
audit matter as any control lapses, 
validation failures, incorrect input 
data and wrong extraction of data 
may result in wrong reporting of data 
to the management and regulators.

**Our audit approach included: -**

•	 Understanding 
the 
coding 
system adopted by the Bank for 
various categories of customers.
•	 Reviewed 
the 
design, 
implementation and operating 
effectiveness of the Bank’s IT 
controls including application, 
access controls that are critical 
to financial reporting on test 
check basis.
•	 Understanding 
the 
feeding 
of the data in the system and 
going through the extraction of 
the financial information and 
statements from the IT system 
existing in the Bank.
•	 Checking 
of 
the 
user 
requirements for any changes 
in the regulations/ policy of the 
Bank.
•	 Reviewed the reports generated 
by the system on sample basis.
•	 Reviewed 
the 
report 
of 
independent 
IT 
Expert 
on 
review of SASCL Application 
(Income Recognition and Asset 
Classification 
solution) 
used 
by CBS including the review of 
“Baseline Requirements for the 
NPA classification Solution”.

**gekjk ifj.kke% 
ysunsu ds egRo dks ns[krs gq, gekjh ys[kk 
ijh{kk  çfØ;k ds ifj.kke mfpr vkSj 
larks"ktud ik, x,A**

**gekjs 
ys[kkijh{kk 
–f"Vdks.k 
esa 
fuEufyf[kr 'kkfey gSa% &**

**y fofHkUu Jsf.k;ksa ds xzkgdksa ds fy, cSad  
}kjk viuk, x, dksÇMx flLVe dks 
le>uk**

**y cSad ds fofu;eksa@uhfr esa fdlh Hkh 
cnyko ds dkj.k mi;ksxdrkZ dh 
vko';drkvksa dh tk¡p djukA**

**y flLVe ls foÙkh; tkudkjh vkSj  
fooj.kksa dks fudkyukA**

----

Our Results:

There 
is 
continuous 
progress, 
still the system needs to be 
strengthened for its efficacy to 
control deficiencies of input/output 
data from the system.

Litigation & Contingent Liabilities

Assessment of Contingent liabilities 
in respect of certain litigations 
including Direct and Indirect Taxes 
and various other claims filed by 
other parties upon the Bank not 
acknowledged as debts.

The 
Bank’s 
assessment 
is 
supported 
by 
the 
facts 
of 
matter, their own judgment, past 
experience, and advice from legal 
and independent tax consultants 
wherever considered necessary. 

Accordingly, unexpected adverse 
outcomes may significantly impact 
the Bank’s reported profit and the 
Balance Sheet.

We determined the above area 
as a Key Audit Matter in view of 
associated uncertainty relating to 
the outcome of litigations which 
requires application of judgment in 
interpretation of law.

Accordingly, our audit was focused 
on analysing the facts of subject 
matter under consideration and 
judgments/ interpretation of law 
involved.

Our audit approach included: -

•	 Going 
through 
the 
current 
status of the tax litigations and 
contingent liabilities;

•	 Examining the orders and/or 
communication received from 
various Tax Authorities/ Judicial 
forums and follow up action 
thereon;

•	 Evaluating 
the 
merits 
of 
the 
subject 
matter 
under 
consideration with reference to 
the grounds presented therein 
and available independent legal 
/ tax advice; and

•	 Wherever required, reliance is 
placed on the opinion of legal 
and tax consultants.

**Information Other than the Standalone Financial Statements 
and Auditor’s Report thereon**

5.	
The Bank’s Board of Directors is responsible for the other 
information. The other information comprises the Directors’ 
Report, 
including 
annexures, 
Corporate 
Governance 
Report and other reports (but does not include the financial 
statements and our auditor’s report thereon). Our opinion on 
the Standalone Financial Statements does not cover the other 
information and we do not and will not express any form of 
assurance conclusion thereon.

	
In connection with our audit of the Standalone Financial 
Statements, our responsibility is to read the other information 
and, in doing so, consider whether the other information 
is materially inconsistent with the Standalone Financial 
Statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise 
appears to be materially misstated. 

	
If, based on the work we have performed, we conclude that 
there is a material misstatement of this other information, we 
are required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in 
this regard.

**eqdnesckth vkSj vkdfLed ns;rk,¡**

**gekjs ys[kkijh{kk –f"Vdks.k esa fuEu 
'kkfey jgs %&**

**y dj eqdneksa vkSj vkdfLed ns;rkvksa 
dh orZeku fLFkfr dks tkuuk(**

**y tgka Hkh vko';drk gqÃ] dkuwuh vkSj 
dj lykgdkjksa dh jk; dk lgkjk 
fy;k x;k gSA**

----

**Responsibilities of Management and Those Charged with 
Governance for the Standalone Financial Statements**

6.	
The Bank’s Board of Directors is responsible with respect to 
the preparation of these Standalone Financial Statements 
that give a true and fair view of the financial position, financial 
performance and cash flows of the Bank in accordance with the 
accounting principles generally accepted in India, including the 
applicable Accounting Standards, and provisions of Section 
29 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and circulars and 
guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India (‘RBI’) from 
time to time. This responsibility also includes maintenance of 
adequate accounting records in accordance with the provisions 
of the Act for safeguarding of the assets of the Bank and for 
preventing and detecting frauds and other irregularities; 
selection and application of appropriate accounting policies; 
making judgments and estimates that are reasonable and 
prudent; and design, implementation and maintenance of 
adequate internal financial controls, that were operating 
effectively for ensuring the accuracy and completeness 
of the accounting records, relevant to the preparation and 
presentation of the standalone financial statements that give 
a true and fair view and are free from material misstatement, 
whether due to fraud or error.

	
In 
preparing 
the 
Standalone 
Financial 
Statements, 
management is responsible for assessing the Bank’s ability to 
continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters 
related to going concern and using the going concern basis of 
accounting unless management either intends to liquidate the 
Bank or to cease operations, or has no realistic alternative but 
to do so.

**Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Standalone 
Financial Statements**

7.	
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about 
whether the standalone financial statements as a whole are 
free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, 
and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinion. 
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not 
a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with SAs 
will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.

	
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are 
considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they 
could reasonably be expected to influence the economic 
decisions of users taken on the basis of these standalone 
financial statements.

	
As part of an audit in accordance with SAs, we exercise 
professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism 
throughout the audit. We also:

•	
Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the 
financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and 
perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain 

**,dy foÙkh; fooj.kksa dh ys[kkijh{kk gsrq ys[kkijh{kdksa dk 
mÙkjnkf;Ro**

----

audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide 
a basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material 
misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one 
resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, 
intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of 
internal control.

•	
Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the 
audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate 
in the circumstances.

•	
Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used 
and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related 
disclosures made by management.

•	
Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the 
going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit 
evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists 
related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt 
on the bank’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we 
conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required to 
draw attention in our auditor’s report to the related disclosures 
in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are 
inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our conclusions are based 
on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our auditor’s 
report. However, future events or conditions may cause the 
bank to cease to continue as a going concern.

•	
Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the 
financial statements, including the disclosures, and whether 
the financial statements represent the underlying transactions 
and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.

	
Materiality is the magnitude of the misstatements in the 
standalone financial statements that, individually or aggregate, 
makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably 
knowledgeable user of the financial statements may be 
influenced. We consider quantitative materiality and qualitative 
factors in (i) planning of the scope of our audit work and 
evaluating the results of our work; and (ii) to evaluate the effect 
of any identified misstatement in the financial statements.

	
We communicate with those charged with governance 
regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and 
timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including 
any significant deficiencies in internal control that we identify 
during our audit.

	
We also provide those charged with governance with a 
statement that we have complied with relevant ethical 
requirements regarding independence, and to communicate 
with them all relationships and other matters that may 
reasonably be thought to bear on our independence, and 
where applicable, related safeguards.

----

	
From the matters communicated with those charged with 
governance, we determine those matters that were of most 
significance in the audit of the financial statements of the 
current period and are therefore the key audit matters. We 
describe these matters in our auditor’s report unless law or 
regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or 
when, in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a 
matter should not be communicated in our report because 
the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably 
be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such 
communication.

**Other Matters**

8.	
We did not audit the financial statements / information of 1629 
(number) branches and other offices, 1 foreign branch and 
1 International Banking Unit situated at GIFT City included 
in the standalone financial statements of the Bank whose 
financial statements / financial information reflect total assets 
of Rs. 2,74,666.07 crores as at 31st March 2024 and total 
revenue of Rs. 19,064.58 crores for the year ended on that 
date, as considered in the standalone financial statements. 
These branches and other offices and foreign branches 
cover 22.61% of advances, 26.43% of deposits and 31.10% 
of non-performing assets as at 31st March 2024 and 15.85% 
of revenue for the year ended 31st March 2024. The financial 
statements / information of these branches has been audited 
by the branch auditors whose reports have been furnished to 
us, and our opinion in so far as it relates to the amounts and 
disclosures included in respect of branches, is based solely on 
the report of such branch auditors.

9.	
The Standalone Financial results of the Bank for the previous 
year ended 31st March, 2023 were audited by the joint auditors, 
three of them are predecessor audit firms and have expressed 
unmodified opinion on such financial results vide report dated 
May 19, 2023.

	
Our opinion is not modified in respect of this matter.

**Report on Other Legal and Regulatory Requirements**

10.	 The Balance Sheet and the Profit and Loss Account have 
been drawn up in accordance with Section 29 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949;

11.	 Subject to the limitations of the audit indicated in paragraphs 
8 and 9 above and as required by the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980, 
and subject also to the limitations of disclosure required 
therein, we report that:

a.	
We have obtained all the information and explanations 
which, to the best of our knowledge and belief, were 
necessary for the purposes of our audit and have found 
them to be satisfactory;

**vU; ekeys**

**bu ekeys ds lacaèk esa gekjk vfHker cnyk ugÈ gSA**

**fofèkd vkSj fofu;ked vko';drkvksa ij fjiksVZ**

----

b.	
The transactions of the Bank, which have come to our 
notice, have been within the powers of the Bank; and

c.	
The returns received from the offices and branches of the 
Bank have been found adequate for the purposes of our 
audit.

12.	 As required by letter No. DOS. ARG. No. 6270/08.91.001/ 
2019-20 dated 17th March 2020 on “Appointment of Statutory 
Central Auditors (SCAs) in Public Sector Banks – Reporting 
obligations for SCAs from FY 2019-20”, read with subsequent 
communication dated 19 May 2020 issued by the RBI, we 
further report on the matters specified in paragraph 2 of the 
aforesaid letter as under:

a.	
In our opinion, the aforesaid Standalone Financial 
Statements comply with the applicable Accounting 
Standards issued by ICAI, to the extent they are not 
inconsistent with the accounting policies prescribed by 
the RBI. 

b.	
There are no observations or comments on financial 
transactions or matters which have any adverse effect on 
the functioning of the Bank.

c.	
As the Bank is not registered under the Companies Act, 
2013 the disqualification from being a director of the bank 
under sub-section (2) of section 164 of the Companies 
Act, 2013 do not apply to the Bank.

d.	
There are no qualifications, reservations or adverse 
remarks relating to the maintenance of accounts and 
other matters connected therewith. 

e.	
Our audit report on the adequacy and operating 
effectiveness of the Bank’s internal financial controls over 
financial reporting is given in Annexure A to this report. 
Our report expresses an unmodified opinion on the 
Bank’s internal financial controls over financial reporting 
as at 31 March 2024.

**13.	  We further report that:**

a.	
In our opinion, proper books of account as required by law 
have been kept by the Bank so far as it appears from our 
examination of those books and proper returns adequate for 
the purposes of our audit have been received from branches 
not visited by us;

b.	
the Balance Sheet, the Profit and Loss Account and the 
Statement of Cash Flows dealt with by this report are in 
agreement with the books of account and with the returns 
received from the branches not visited by us;

**13-	ge vkxs fjiksVZ djrs gSa fd%**

----

**—rs Mh ds NktM+ ,aM daiuh  
For D K Chhajer & Co 
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 304138bZ          
FRN: 304138E**

**—rs ,l lh ckiuk ,aM ,lksfl,V~l  
For S C Bapna & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj 
 Chartered Accountants
 ,Qvkj,u% 115649MCY;w
FRN: 115649W**

**—rs mesn tSu ,aM daiuh  
For Ummed Jain & Co
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
 ,Qvkj,u% 119250MCY;w
FRN: 119250W**

**lunh ys[kkdkj fnus'k xksfndk
CA Dinesh Godika
Hkkxhnkj 
Partner
¼lnL; la- 072738½
(M.No. 072738) 
;wMhvkbZ,u% 24072738BKEGTP3401
UDIN: 24072738BKEGTP3401**

**—rs ,u ds HkkxZo ,aM daiuh
For N K Bhargava & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants  
,Qvkj,u% 000429,u 
 FRN:  000429N**

**—rs ih ,l Mh ,aM ,lksfl,V~l
 For P S D & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 004501lh
 FRN: 004501C**

**LFkku% ubZ fnYyh
Place: New Delhi
fnukad% 09 ebZ] 2024**

**Date: May 09, 2024**

c.	
the reports on the accounts of the branch offices audited by 
branch auditors of the Bank under section 29 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 have been sent to us and have been 
properly dealt with by us in preparing this report; and 

d.	
In our opinion, the Balance Sheet, the Profit and Loss Account 
and the Statement of Cash Flows comply with the applicable 
accounting standards, to the extent they are not inconsistent 
with the accounting policies prescribed by RBI.

----

**ANNEXURE “A” TO THE INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT**

(Referred to in paragraph 12 (e) under ‘Report on Other Legal 
and Regulatory Requirements’ section of our report of even date)

**Report on the Internal Financial Controls over Financial 
Reporting as required by the Reserve Bank of India (the “RBI”) 
Letter DOS.ARG. No.6270/08.91.001/2019-20 dated March 17, 
2020 (as amended) (the “RBI communication”)**

We have audited the internal financial controls over financial 
reporting of Punjab National Bank (“the Bank”) as of 31 March, 
2024 in conjunction with our audit of the Standalone Financial 
Statements of the Bank for the year ended on that date which 
includes internal financial controls over financial reporting of the 
Bank’s branches.

**Management’s Responsibility for Internal Financial Controls**

The Bank’s management is responsible for establishing and 
maintaining internal financial controls based on the internal control 
over financial reporting criteria established by the Bank considering 
the essential components of internal control stated in the Guidance 
Note on Audit of Internal Financial Controls over Financial 
Reporting issued by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
India. These responsibilities include the design, implementation 
and maintenance of adequate internal financial controls that were 
operating effectively for ensuring the orderly and efficient conduct 
of its business, including adherence to the Bank’s policies, the 
safeguarding of its assets, the prevention and detection of frauds 
and errors, the accuracy and completeness of the accounting 
records, and the timely preparation of reliable financial information, 
as required under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and the 
circulars and guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India. 

**Auditor’s Responsibility**

Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Bank's internal 
financial controls over financial reporting based on our audit. We 
conducted our audit in accordance with the Guidance Note on 
Audit of Internal Financial Controls Over Financial Reporting (“the 
Guidance Note”) issued by the Institute of Chartered Accountants 
of India (“the ICAI”) and the Standards on Auditing (SAs) issued 
by the ICAI, to the extent applicable to an audit of internal financial 
controls. Those Standards and the Guidance Note require that we 
comply with ethical requirements and plan and perform the audit 
to obtain reasonable assurance about whether adequate internal 
financial controls over financial reporting were established and 
maintained and if such controls operated effectively in all material 
respects. 

Our audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence 
about the adequacy of the internal financial controls over financial 
reporting and their operating effectiveness. Our audit of internal 
financial controls over financial reporting included obtaining an 

**ys[kk ijh{kd dh Lora= fjiksVZ gsrq vuqcaèk *,***

**vkarfjd foÙkh; fu;a=.k ds fy, cSad çcaèku dk mÙkjnkf;Ro**

**ys[kk ijh{kd ds mÙkjnkf;Ro**

----

understanding of internal financial controls over financial reporting, 
assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and 
evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control 
based on the assessed risk. The procedures selected depend on 
the auditor’s judgement, including the assessment of the risks of 
material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to 
fraud or error. 

We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained and the audit 
evidence obtained by the branch auditors, in terms of their reports 
referred to in the Other Matters paragraph below, is sufficient and 
appropriate to provide a basis for our audit opinion on the Bank’s 
internal financial controls over financial reporting. 

**Meaning of Internal Financial Controls over Financial Reporting**

A Bank’s internal financial controls over financial reporting is a 
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding 
the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial 
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles. A Bank’s internal financial controls 
over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures 
that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable 
detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions 
of the assets of the Bank; (2) provide reasonable assurance that 
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation 
of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted 
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the 
Bank are being made only in accordance with authorizations of 
management and directors of the Bank; and (3) provide reasonable 
assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized 
acquisition, use, or disposition of the Bank's assets that could have 
a material effect on the financial statements. 

**Inherent Limitations of Internal Financial Controls over 
Financial Reporting**

Because of the inherent limitations of internal financial controls over 
financial reporting, including the possibility of collusion or improper 
management override of controls, material misstatements due to 
error or fraud may occur and not be detected. Also, projections 
of any evaluation of the internal financial controls over financial 
reporting to future periods are subject to the risk that the internal 
financial controls over financial reporting may become inadequate 
because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance 
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. 

**Opinion**

In our opinion, and to the best of our information and according 
to the explanations given to us and based on the consideration of 
the reports of the branch auditors referred to in the Other Matters 
paragraph below, the Bank has, in all material respects, adequate 
internal financial controls over financial reporting that were 
operating effectively as at 31 March, 2024, based on the criteria 

**foÙkh; fjiksÉVx ij vkarfjd foÙkh; fu;a=.k dk vFkZ**

**foÙkh; fjiksÉVx ij vkarfjd foÙkh; fu;a=.k dh varÆufgr lhek,a**

**vfHker**

----

for internal financial control over financial reporting established by 
the Bank considering the essential components of internal control 
stated in the Guidance Note on Audit of Internal Financial Controls 
Over Financial Reporting issued by the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of India. 

Other Matters 

Our aforesaid report in so far as it relates to the operating 
effectiveness of internal financial controls over financial reporting of 
1631 branches/offices is based on the corresponding reports of the 
respective branch auditors of those branches. 

Our opinion is not modified in respect of this matter. 

**—rs Mh ds NktM+ ,aM daiuh  
For D K Chhajer & Co 
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 304138bZ
FRN: 304138E**

**—rs ,l lh ckiuk ,aM ,lksfl,V~l  
For S C Bapna & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj 
 Chartered Accountants
 ,Qvkj,u% 115649MCY;w
FRN: 115649W**

**—rs mesn tSu ,aM daiuh  
For Ummed Jain & Co
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
 ,Qvkj,u% 119250MCY;w
FRN: 119250W**

**lunh ys[kkdkj fnus'k xksfndk
CA Dinesh Godika
Hkkxhnkj 
Partner
¼lnL; la- 072738½
(M.No. 072738) 
;wMhvkbZ,u% 24072738BKEGTP3401
UDIN: 24072738BKEGTP3401**

**—rs ,u ds HkkxZo ,aM daiuh
For N K Bhargava & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants  
,Qvkj,u% 000429,u 
 FRN:  000429N**

**—rs ih ,l Mh ,aM ,lksfl,V~l
 For P S D & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 004501lh
 FRN: 004501C**

**LFkku% ubZ fnYyh
Place: New Delhi
fnukad% 09 ebZ] 2024**

**Date: May 09, 2024**

**vU; ekeys**

**bu ekeys ds lacaèk esa gekjk vfHker cnyk ugÈ gSA**

----


¼Rs.000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gSa½ (Rs.000’s omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
vuqlwph
Schedule
31.03.2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks
As on 31.03.2023**

vkdfLed ns;rk,a
Contingent liabilities
12
223523,68,66
644471,87,67
olwyh ds fy, fcy
Bills for Collection
36019,11,64
34377,59,61

**izeq[k ys[kkadu uhfr;ka
Significant Accounting Policies
17**

ys[kksa ij fVIif.k;ka
Notes on Accounts
18
mi;qZä vuqlwfp;ka rqyu&i= dk ,d vfHkUu vax gSaA
Schedules referred to above form an integral part of the Balance Sheet.

**izcq) ’kekZ
Prabudh Sharma
lgk;d egkizca/kd
Asstt. General Manager**

**eqds’k dqekj
Mukesh Kumar     
lgk;d egkizca/kd
Asstt. General Manager**

**vkj ds [khph
R K Khichi 
mi egkizca/kd
Deputy General Manager**

**izoh.k dqekj ’kekZ
Praveen Kumar Sharma
egkizca/kd
General Manager**

**Mh ds tSu
D K Jain
eq[; egkizca/kd vkSj lh,Qvks
Chief General Manager & CFO**

----

**fcHkq izlkn egkik=
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra 
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**,e ijef’koe
M Paramasivam  
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**fcuksn dqekj
Binod Kumar
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**dY;k.k dqekj
Kalyan Kumar
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**vrqy dqekj xks;y
Atul Kumar Goel
izca/k funs’kd ,oa eq[; dk;Zikyd vf/kdkjh
Managing Director & CEO**

**ds th vuarÑ".ku
K G Ananthakrishnan
v/;{k
Chairman**

**MkW- js[kk tSu
Dr. Rekha Jain
funs'kd
Director**

**latho dqekj fla?ky
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
funs'kd
Director**

**iadt tks’kh
Pankaj Joshi
funs'kd
Director**

**mek ’kadj
Uma Sankar
funs'kd
Director**

**iadt ’kekZ
Pankaj Sharma
funs'kd
Director**

**Ñrs Mh ds NktM+ ,aM daiuh
For D K Chhajer & Co. 
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u@FRN: 304138E**

**Ñrs ,l lh ciuk ,aM ,lksfl,V~l 
For S C Bapna & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u@FRN: 115649W**

**Ñrs mesn tSu ,aM daiuh
For Ummed Jain & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u@FRN: 119250W**

**lunh ys[kkdkj fd’kksj ljkZQ
CA Nand Kishore Sarraf 
Hkkxhnkj
Partner  
(lnL; la-@M.No. 510708)**

**lunh ys[kkdkj t; izdk’k xqIrk
CA Jai Prakash Gupta 
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
(lnL; la-@M.No. 088903)**

**lunh ys[kkdkj fnus’k xksfndk
CA Dinesh Godika
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
(lnL; la-@M.No. 072738)**

**Ñrs ,u ds HkkxZo ,aM daiuh
For N K Bhargava & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants  
 ,Qvkj,u@FRN:  000429N**

**Ñrs ih ,l Mh ,aM ,lksfl,V~l
For P S D & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
 ,Qvkj,u@FRN: 004501C**

**lunh ys[kkdkj ,u ds HkkxZo
CA N K Bhargava   
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
(lnL; la-@M.No.080624)**

**lunh ys[kkdkj vfHkuo 'kekZ
CA Abhinav Sharma  
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
(lnL; la-@M.No. 411219)**

**LFkku% ubZ fnYyh
Place: New Delhi
fnukad% 9 ebZ] 2024
Date: May 09, 2024**

----

**fooj.k
Particulars
vuqlwph
Schedule
31.03.2024 dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 31.03.2023**

**I.
vk;
Income**

vÆtr C;kt
Interest earned
13
106901,62,00
85144,11,13

vU; vk;
Other Income
14
13383,53,96
12142,53,13

**dqy@Total
         120285,15,96
            97286,64,26**

**II.
O;;
Expenditure**

O;; fd;k x;k C;kt
Interest expended
15
66818,55,20
50652,47,47

ifjpkyu [kpZ
Operating expenses
16
28535,79,80
24105,40,85

çkoèkku vkSj vkdfLedrk,¡
Provisions and Contingencies
16686,19,41
20021,55,45

**dqy@Total
          112040,54,41
            94779,43,77**

**III.
ykHk@gkfu
Profit/Loss**

**o"kZ ds fy, fuoy ykHk@¼gkfu½
Net Profit/(Loss) for the year 
8244,61,55
2507,20,49**

tksM+sa% ykHk vkSj gkfu [kkrs esa 'ks"k
Add: Balance in Profit and Loss A/c
79,25
0

**fofu;kstu gsrq miyCèk ykHk
Profit available for Appropriation
8245,40,80
2507,20,49**

**IV.
fofu;kstu
Appropriations**

lkafofèkd vkjf{kr fufèk esa varj.k
Transfer to Statutory Reserves
2061,15,39
626,80,13

iwath vkjf{kr fufèk esa varj.k
Transfer to Capital Reserves
46,28,24
52,15,39

fuos'k vkjf{kr fufèk esa varj.k
Transfer to Investment Reserve
0
0

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
vuqlwph
Schedule
31.03.2024 dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 31.03.2023**

fuos'k mrkj&p<+ko vkjf{kr fufèk esa varj.k
Transfer to Investment Fluctuation Reserve
288,95,13
194,74,12

vk;dj vfèkfu;e ds vuqlkj fo'ks"k vkjf{kr fufèk esa 
varj.k
Transfer to Special Reserve as per Income Tax Act
397,12,00
250,00,00

çLrkfor ykHkka'k
Proposed Dividend
1651,65,23
715,71,60

vU; vkjf{kr fufèk esa varj.k
Transfer to Other Reserves
3799,44,00
667,00,00

ykHk vkSj gkfu [kkrs esa 'ks"k 
Balance in Profit and Loss Account
80,81
79,25

**dqy@Total
              8245,40,80
              2507,20,49**

 

**7.49**

 

**2.28**

**egRoiw.kZ ys[kkadu uhfr;ka
Significant Accounting Policies
17**

**ys[kksa ij fVIif.k;ka
Notes on Accounts
18**

**izcq) ’kekZ
Prabudh Sharma
lgk;d egkizca/kd
Asstt. General Manager**

**eqds’k dqekj
Mukesh Kumar     
lgk;d egkizca/kd
Asstt. General Manager**

**vkj ds [khph
R K Khichi 
mi egkizca/kd
Deputy General Manager**

**izoh.k dqekj ’kekZ
Praveen Kumar Sharma
egkizca/kd
General Manager**

**Mh ds tSu
D K Jain
eq[; egkizca/kd vkSj lh,Qvks
Chief General Manager & CFO**

**fcHkq izlkn egkik=
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra 
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**,e ijef’koe
M Paramasivam  
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**fcuksn dqekj
Binod Kumar
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**dY;k.k dqekj
Kalyan Kumar
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

----

**vrqy dqekj xks;y
Atul Kumar Goel
izca/k funs’kd ,oa eq[; dk;Zikyd vf/kdkjh
Managing Director & CEO**

**ds th vuarÑ".ku
K G Ananthakrishnan
v/;{k
Chairman**

**MkW- js[kk tSu
Dr. Rekha Jain
funs'kd
Director**

**latho dqekj fla?ky
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
funs'kd
Director**

**iadt tks’kh
Pankaj Joshi
funs'kd
Director**

**mek ’kadj
Uma Sankar
funs'kd
Director**

**iadt ’kekZ
Pankaj Sharma
funs'kd
Director**

**Ñrs Mh ds NktM+ ,aM daiuh
For D K Chhajer & Co. 
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u@FRN: 304138E**

**Ñrs ,l lh ciuk ,aM ,lksfl,V~l 
For S C Bapna & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u@FRN: 115649W**

**Ñrs mesn tSu ,aM daiuh
For Ummed Jain & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u@FRN: 119250W**

**lunh ys[kkdkj fd’kksj ljkZQ
CA Nand Kishore Sarraf 
Hkkxhnkj
Partner  
(lnL; la-@M.No. 510708)**

**lunh ys[kkdkj t; izdk’k xqIrk
CA Jai Prakash Gupta 
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
(lnL; la-@M.No. 088903)**

**lunh ys[kkdkj fnus’k xksfndk
CA Dinesh Godika
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
(lnL; la-@M.No. 072738)**

**Ñrs ,u ds HkkxZo ,aM daiuh
For N K Bhargava & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants  
 ,Qvkj,u@FRN:  000429N**

**Ñrs ih ,l Mh ,aM ,lksfl,V~l
For P S D & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
 ,Qvkj,u@FRN: 004501C**

**lunh ys[kkdkj ,u ds HkkxZo
CA N K Bhargava   
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
(lnL; la-@M.No.080624)**

**lunh ys[kkdkj vfHkuo 'kekZ
CA Abhinav Sharma  
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
(lnL; la-@M.No. 411219)**

**LFkku% ubZ fnYyh
Place: New Delhi
fnukad% 9 ebZ] 2024
Date: May 09, 2024**

----

**,dy ys[kksa dh vuqlwph ¼iatkc uS'kuy cSad½
SCHEDULES TO THE STANDALONE ACCOUNTS (PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK)**

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks
As on 31.03.2023**

**vuqlwph 1&iw¡th
SCHEDULE 1 - CAPITAL**

çkf/kÑr
Authorised
 

        3000,00,00
           3000,00,00

**tkjh ,oa vfHknÙk
Issued and Subscribed**

        2202,20,31
           2202,20,31

**çnÙk
Paid Up**

2202,20,31
2202,20,31

**dqy@Total
       2202,20,31
          2202,20,31**

**vuqlwph 2 & vkjf{kr fufèk;ka vkSj vfèk'ks"k
SCHEDULE 2 - RESERVES AND SURPLUS**

**I.
lkafofèkd vkjf{kr fufèk;ka
Statutory Reserves**

çkjafHkd 'ks"k
Opening Balance   
15778,28,38
15151,48,25

 

tksM+sa% ykHk o gkfu fo;kstu [kkrs ls varfjr
Add: Transfer from P&L Appropriation A/c
2061,15,39
17839,43,77
626,80,13
15778,28,38

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks
As on 31.03.2023**

**II.
iwathxr vkjf{kr fufèk;ka 
Capital Reserves**

**,½	 iqueZwY;kadu vjf{kr fufèk;ka
a)	
Revaluation Reserve**

çkjafHkd 'ks"k
Opening Balance   
8455,12,74
7048,62,41

o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f)
Addition during the year
20,39,61
2113,65,84

o"kZ ds nkSjku dVkSrh
Deduction during the year
1,22,08
376,00,78

vkjf{kr fuf/k;ksa esa varfjr ¼fuoy½
Transfer to Other Reserves (net)
168,67,28
8305,62,99
331,14,73
8455,12,74

**ch½	 vU;
b)	
Others**

	
¼9268-29 djksM+ #i;s ds lekesyu vkjf{kr fuf/k lfgr½

	
(including Amalgamation Reserve of Rs. 9268.29 Crore)

**çkjafHkd 'ks"k**

	
Opening Balance   
16627,56,12
16575,40,73

**tksM+sa% ykHk o gkfu fo;kstu [kkrs ls varfjr**

	
Add: Transfer from P&L Appropriation A/c
46,28,24
16673,84,36
52,15,39
16627,56,12

**III.
'ks;j izhfe;e
Share Premium**

çkjafHkd 'ks"k
Opening Balance   
46012,18,78
46012,18,78

o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f)
Addition during the year
0
46012,18,78
0
46012,18,78

**IV.
jktLo ,oa vU; vkjf{kr fufèk;k¡
Revenue and Other Reserves**

**,½	fuos'k vkjf{kr fufèk
a)	 Investment Reserve**

çkjafHkd 'ks"k
      Opening Balance   
386,34,51
386,34,51

	
tksM+sa% ykHk o gkfu fo;kstu [kkrs ls varfjr
      Add: Transfer from P&L Appropriation A/c
0
386,34,51
0
386,34,51

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks
As on 31.03.2023
ch½	 fuos'k mrkj&p<+ko vkjf{kr fufèk
b)	
Investment Fluctuation Reserve**

**çkjafHkd 'ks"k**

	
Opening Balance   
1588,40,07
1393,65,95

**tksM+sa% ykHk o gkfu fo;kstu [kkrs ls varfjr**

	
Add: Transfer from P&L Appropriation A/c
288,95,13
1877,35,20
194,74,12
1588,40,07

**lh½	fofue; mrkj&p<+ko vkjf{kr fufèk
c)	
Exchange Fluctuation Reserve**

	
çkjafHkd 'ks"k

	
Opening Balance   
230,10,87
419,43,44

	
tksM+sa% o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f)

	
Add: Addition during the year
9,63,91
95,85,08

**?kVk,a% o"kZ ds nkSjku dVkSrh**

	
Less: Deduction during the year
86,34
238,88,44
285,17,65
230,10,87

Mh½	 vk;dj vf/kfu;e 1961 dh /kkjk 36¼1½¼viii½ ds varxZr fo'ks"k vkjf{kr fuf/k
d)	
Special Reserve under Sec.36(1) (viii) of Income Tax Act, 1961

	
çkjafHkd 'ks"k

	
Opening Balance   
3618,66,00
3368,66,00

**o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f)**

	
Addition during the year
397,12,00
4015,78,00
250,00,00
3618,66,00

**bZ½	 vU; fjtoZ
e)	
Other Reserve**

	
çkjafHkd 'ks"k

	
Opening Balance   
4955,98,89
2928,89,16

**o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f)**

	
Addition during the year
0
1028,95,00

**tksM+sa% ykHk o gkfu fo;kstu [kkrs ls varfjr**

	
Add: Transfer from P&L Appropriation A/c
3799,44,00
667,00,00

**tksM+sa% iquZewY;kadu vkjf{kr fuf/k;ksa ls varj.k ¼fuoy½**

	
Add: Transfer from Revaluation Reserves (net)
168,67,28
8924,10,17
331,14,73
4955,98,89
 

V.
ykHk ,oa gkfu [kkrs esa 'ks"k jkf'k
Balance in Profit and Loss Account
çkjafHkd 'ks"k
Opening Balance
79,25
0

o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f) 
Addition during the year
8244,61,55
2507,20,49

?kVk,a% ykHk vkSj gkfu ds fooj.k ds vuqlkj fofu;ksx
Less: Appropriations as per Statement of Profit & Loss
8244,59,99
80,81
2506,41,24
79,25

**dqy ¼I, II, III, IV vkSj V½
Total (I, II, III, IV and V)
   104274,37,03
         97653,45,61**

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks
As on 31.03.2023**

**vuqlwph 3 & tekjkf'k;ka
SCHEDULE 3 - DEPOSITS**

,- I 
A.I.

**ekax tekjkf'k;ka
Demand Deposits**

(i)	 cSadksa ls 
	
From Banks
3334,39,70
3197,04,11

(ii)	 vU; ls
	
From Others
68866,63,11
70831,03,04

**72201,02,81
74028,07,15**

**II.
cpr cSad tekjkf'k;ka
Savings Bank Deposits
480298,32,81
463987,24,88**

**III.
fe;knh tekjkf'k;ka
Term Deposits**

(i)	 cSadksa ls 
	
From Banks
66126,76,26
50980,03,15

(ii)	 vU; ls
	
From Others
751086,68,67
692167,75,27

**817213,44,93
743147,78,42**

**dqy ¼I, II vkSj III½
Total (I, II and III)
 1369712,80,55
    1281163,10,45**

ch-
B.
(i)	 Hkkjr esa fLFkr 'kk[kkvksa dh tekjkf'k;ka
	
Deposits of branches in India
1333364,99,49
1251708,09,19

(ii)	 Hkkjr ls ckgj fLFkr 'kk[kkvksa dh tekjkf'k;ka
	
Deposits of branches outside India
36347,81,06
29455,01,26

**dqy@Total
 1369712,80,55
    1281163,10,45**

**vuqlwph 4 & mèkkj jkf'k;ka
SCHEDULE 4 - BORROWINGS**

**I.
Hkkjr esa mèkkj jkf'k;ka
Borrowings in India**

(a)	 Hkkjrh; fjt+oZ cSad ls
	
Reserve Bank of India
0
0

(b)	  vU; cSadksa ls	
	
Other Banks
15,43
55,80

(c)	 vU; laLFkku vkSj ,tsafl;ka  
	
Other Institutions and Agencies
3458,15,14
6921,49,34

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks
As on 31.03.2023**

(d)	 vlqjf{kr çfrns; ckW.M
	
Unsecured Redeemable Bonds

(ii)	 vij fV;j&II c‚.M
	
Upper Tier-II Bonds 
0
0

(iii)	 fV;j&II iwath ds fy, v/khuLFk _.k
	
Subordinate debts for Tier II Capital
20003,00,00
18913,00,00

(iv)	 nh?kZdkfyd volajpuk c‚.M 
	
Long term infrastructure bonds
2800,00,00
2800,00,00
38995,00,00
31893,00,00

II.
Hkkjr ds ckgj mèkkj jkf'k;ka
Borrowings outside India
7976,54,78
12476,67,94

**dqy ¼I vkSj II½ TOTAL (I and II)
     50429,85,35
         51291,73,08**

mi;Zqä I vkSj II esa 'kkfey çfrHkwr mèkkj jkf'k;ka 
Secured Borrowings included in I and II above
2168,53,00
4765,86,00

**vuqlwph 5 & vU; ns;rk,a vkSj çkoèkku
SCHEDULE 5 - OTHER LIABILITIES AND PROVISIONS**

vuqlwph 6 & Hkkjrh; fjt+oZ cSad ds ikl udnh vkSj 'ks"k
SCHEDULE 6 - CASH AND BALANCES WITH RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
 

(a)	 pkyw [kkrs esa 
	
in Current Account
 
61498,74,23
53337,57,61

(b)	 vU; [kkrksa esa  
	
in Other Accounts
0
21126,00,00

**dqy (I vkSj II) Total (I and II) 
65032,91,16
78176,57,52**

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks
As on 31.03.2023**

**vuqlwph 7 & cSadksa ds ikl 'ks"k rFkk ekax vkSj vYi lwpuk ij ns; jkf'k
SCHEDULE 7 - BALANCES WITH BANKS AND MONEY AT CALL AND SHORT NOTICE**

**I.
Hkkjr esa    
In India**

(i)	 cSadksa esa 'ks"k jkf'k% 
	
Balances with Banks

 (,½ pkyw [kkrksa esa

	
(a)  in Current Accounts
4,05,08
5,20,62

    ¼ch½ vU; tek [kkrksa esa
	
(b)  in Other Deposit Accounts
22148,15,56
16754,58,11

 
22152,20,64
16759,78,73

(ii)	 ekax vkSj vYi lwpuk ij ns; jkf'k
	
Money at Call and Short Notice

       ¼d½ cSadksa ds ikl
	
(a)  with Banks
0
0

      ¼ch½ vU; laLFkkvksa ds ikl
	
(b)  with Other Institutions
22766,84,06
23057,66,37

 
      22766,84,06
         23057,66,37

dqy ¼i vkSj ii½
Total (i and ii)
      44919,04,70
         39817,45,10

**II.
Hkkjr ls ckgj
Outside India**

(i)	 cSadksa esa 'ks"k jkf'k% 
	
Balances with Banks

 (,½ pkyw [kkrksa esa

	
(a)  in Current Accounts
3764,39,98
13517,99,50

    ¼ch½ vU; tek [kkrksa esa
	
(b)  in Other Deposit Accounts
15388,22,25
23596,78,71

**19152,62,23
37114,78,21**

(ii)	 ekax vkSj vYi lwpuk ij ns; jkf'k%
	
Money at Call and Short Notice
0
0

**dqy ¼i vkSj ii½ 
Total (i and ii)
      19152,62,23
         37114,78,21**

**lexz tksM+ ¼I vkSj II½ 
Grand Total (I and II)
     64071,66,93
         76932,23,31**

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks
As on 31.03.2023**

**vuqlwph 8 & fuos'k
SCHEDULE 8 - INVESTMENTS**

**I.
Hkkjr esa fuos'k
Investments in India in**

(i)	 ljdkjh çfrHkwfr;k¡ 
	
Government securities
372073,67,28
352415,23,18

(ii)	 vU; vuqeksfnr çfrHkwfr;k¡
	
Other approved securities
15,00
15,00

(iii)	 'ks;j
	
Shares
2841,30,04
3061,59,23

(iv)	  fMcsapj vkSj c‚.M 
	
Debentures and Bonds
32202,40,72
30622,26,57

(vi)	 vU;
	
Others 
3752,18,96
1452,38,41

**dqy@Total
413352,88,42
389442,88,91**

II.
Hkkjr ls ckgj fuos'k 
Investments outside India in

(i)	 ljdkjh çfrHkwfr;k¡ ¼LFkkuh; çkfèkdkfj;ksa lfgr½ 
	
Government securities (including local authorities)
 
4109,93,85
3850,26,67

(ii)	 fons'k esa lgk;d daifu;k¡ vkSj@;k la;qä m|e
	
Subsidiaries and/or Joint ventures abroad 
 
2218,69,55
2145,86,75

(iii)	 vU;
	
Others
 
636,68,87
557,69,30

**dqy@Total
 
        6965,32,27
            6553,82,72**

**lexz tksM+ ¼I vkSj II½ Grand Total (I and II)            
   420318,20,69
       395996,71,63**

III.
Hkkjr esa fuos'k 
Investments in India

(i)	 fuos'k dk ldy ewY;
	
Gross value of investments
421618,63,16
398450,62,35

(ii)	 ?kVk,¡% ewY;ºzkl ds çkoèkkuksa dk dqy ;ksx
	
Less: Aggregate of provisions for depreciation
8265,74,74
9007,73,44

(iii)	 fuoy fuos'k 
	
Net investment
413352,88,42
389442,88,91

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks
As on 31.03.2023**

**IV.
Hkkjr ds ckgj fuos'k
Investments outside India**

(i)	 fuos'k dk ldy ewY;
	
Gross value of investments
7382,91,54
6979,93,86

(ii)	 ?kVk,¡% ewY;ºzkl ds fy, çkoèkkuksa dk dqy ;ksx 
	
Less: Aggregate of provisions for depreciation
417,59,27
426,11,14

(iii)	 fuoy fuos'k
	
Net investment
6965,32,27
6553,82,72

**lexz tksM+ ¼III vkSj IV½ Grand Total (III and IV)     
420318,20,69
395996,71,63**

**vuqlwph 9 & vfxze
SCHEDULE 9 - ADVANCES**

 A. 
(i)	 [kjhns x, vkSj Hkquk, x, fcy
	
Bills purchased and discounted
5598,87,94
3580,27,45

(ii)	 udn _.k] vksojMªk¶V vkSj ekax ij pqdkSrh&;ksX;  _.k
	
Cash credits, overdrafts and loans repayable on demand
402744,86,45
375668,82,91

(iii)	 eh;knh _.k
	
Term loans
526086,84,85
451584,87,77

**dqy@Total*
934430,59,24
830833,98,13**

(ii)	 cSad@ljdkj dh xkjaVh }kjk izfrHkwr 
	
Covered by Bank/Government guarantees
32372,64,42
22824,72,54

(iii)	 vçfrHkwr  
	
Unsecured
214017,00,63
151035,54,49

**dqy@Total 
934430,59,24
830833,98,13**

lh.I.
C.I.
Hkkjr esa vfxze  
Advances in India

(i)	 çkFkfedrk {ks= 
	
Priority Sector
257461,03,15
238476,43,81

(ii)	 lkoZtfud {ks= 
	
Public Sector
161112,74,10
166389,08,15

(iii)	 cSad
	
Banks
0
0

(iv)	 vU;
	
Others
476546,79,76
392660,21,11

**dqy@Total 
895120,57,01
797525,73,07**

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks
As on 31.03.2023**

**lh.II.
C.II.**

**Hkkjr ds ckgj vfxze
Advances outside India**

(i)	 cSadksa ls çkI; 
	
Due from banks
18279,55,88
15055,53,52

(ii)	 vU; ls çkI; 
	
Due from others

	
(a)	 [kjhns vkSj Hkquk, x, fcy

	
	
Bills purchased and discounted
1563,61,33
676,18,91

	
(b)	 lkewfgd _.k

	
	
Syndicated loans
5849,20,33
5988,07,97

	
(c)	 vU; 

	
	
Others
13617,64,69
11588,44,66

**dqy@Total 
      39310,02,23
         33308,25,06**

**lexz tksM+ ¼lh.I vkSj lh.II½
Grand Total (C.I and C.II) 
    934430,59,24
       830833,98,13**

*The facility wise categorization of provisions has been realignd. Accordingly, previous year's figure have been regrouped without any change in total of advances.

**vuqlwph 10 & vpy vkfLr;ka**

**SCHEDULE 10 - FIXED ASSETS**

**,
A**

**ewrZ vkfLr;ka
Tangible Assets**

**I.
ifjlj
Premises**

fiNys o"kZ dh 31 ekpZ dks ykxr@ewY;kadu ij
At cost / valuation as on 31st March of the preceding year 
12087,14,86
10500,01,33

tksM+s% o"kZ ds nkSjku iquewZY;u
Add: Revaluation during the year
19,17,53
1737,65,06

vof/k ds nkSjku o`f)
Addition during the period
109,39,03
25,83,73

**12215,71,42
12263,50,12**

?kVk,a% o"kZ ds nkSjku dVkSrh
Less: Deduction during the year
97,29
176,35,26

 
12214,74,13
12087,14,86

?kVk,a% vc rd ewY;ºzkl ¼iquewZY;kafdr jkf'k lfgr½
Less: Depreciation to date (Including on revalued amount )
2028,32,45
1805,29,74

**10186,41,68
10281,85,12**

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

?kVk,a% vof/k ds nkSjku dVkSrh  
Less: Deduction during the period
13,01,68
11,25,62
 
10704,74,55
9787,29,49

?kVk,a% vc rd ewY;ºzkl
Less: Depreciation to date       
8776,36,72
8202,52,12
 
1928,37,83
1584,77,37
III
iês okyh vkfLr;ka
Leased Assets
 
 

fiNys o"kZ dh 31 ekpZ dks ykxr ij
At cost as on 31st March of the preceding year
25,23,86
25,23,86

tksM+s% o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f)@lek;kstu
Add: Addition/adjustment during the year
0
0
25,23,86
25,23,86

**ch
B**

**vewrZ vkfLr;ka
Intangible Assets**

 
daI;wVj lkW¶Vos;j
Computer Software

**1369,23,43
1251,32,90**

?kVk,a% o"kZ ds nkSjku dVkSrh
Less: Deduction during the year
79,00
0
 

 
1368,44,43
1251,32,90

?kVk,a% vkt rd ifj'kksf/kr
Less: Amortised to date

1164,46,57
1066,87,94

**dqy@Total 
          203,97,86
             184,44,96**

**¼, vkSj ch½ dk dqy ;ksx Grand Total (A and B)
     12318,77,37
         12051,07,45**

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks
As on 31.03.2023**

**vuqlwph 11 & vU; vkfLr;ka
SCHEDULE 11 - OTHER ASSETS**

I.
 varj&dk;kZy; lek;kstu ¼fuoy½
Inter-office adjustments (net)
0
0

II.
mifpr C;kt
Interest accrued
11678,04,11
8757,89,78

III.
vfxze vnk fd;k x;k dj@lzksr ij dkVk x;k dj 
Tax paid in advance/tax deducted at source
11061,58,95
13166,93,48

IV.
LVs'kujh vkSj LVkai 
Stationery and stamps
7,79,30
6,15,44

V.
nkoksa ds fuiVu ls çkI; xSj&cSafdax vkfLr;ka
Non-banking assets acquired in satisfaction of claims
26,44,97
26,44,97

VI.
vkLFkfxr dj vkfLr ¼fuoy½
Deferred tax asset (net)
22741,53,03
23761,16,30

VII.
vU;  
Others
20147,44,98
22122,18,22

**dqy@Total
     65662,85,34
         67840,78,19**

**vuqlwph 12 & vkdfLed ns;rk,a
SCHEDULE 12 - CONTINGENT LIABILITIES**

I   
(i)	 cSad ds fo#) ,sls nkos ftUgsa _.k ugha ekuk x;k gS 
	
Claims against the bank not acknowledged as debts 
771,34,69
814,56,23

(ii)	 vihy] lanHkksZa vkfn ds vèkhu fookfnr vk;dj o C;kt dj ekax
	
Disputed income tax and interest tax demands under appeals, references etc.
7362,88,10
8687,76,12

II.
vkaf'kd :i ls çnÙk fuos'kksa ds fy, ns;rk,a 
Liability for partly paid investments
209,36,02
252,55,55

III.
cdk;k ok;nk fofu;e lafonkvksa ds dkj.k ns;rk
Liability on account of outstanding forward exchange contracts
132782,70,12
558442,35,10

IV.
xzkgdksa dh vksj ls nh xbZ xkjafV;ka 
Guarantees given on behalf of constituents

(a) 	 Hkkjr esa 
	
In India
54421,03,84
49201,17,84

(b) 	 Hkkjr ds ckgj
	
Outside India
4298,42,83
4633,63,80

**dqy@Total
   223523,68,66
       644471,87,67**

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 31.03.2023**

**vuqlwph 13 & vftZr C;kt
SCHEDULE 13 - INTEREST EARNED**

I.
vfxze@fcy ij C;kt@NwV
Interest/discount on advances/bills
75939,30,89
57319,23,00

II.
fuos'k ij vk;
Income on investments
27644,79,80
25142,86,15

IV.
vU;
Others
538,62,21
791,63,00

**dqy@Total
   106901,62,00
         85144,11,13**

**vuqlwph 14 & vU; vk;
SCHEDULE 14 - OTHER INCOME**

I.
deh'ku] fofue; vkSj nykyh
Commission, exchange and brokerage
4226,21,40
3927,69,46

II.
fuos'k dh fcØh ls ykHk
Profit on sale of Investments
1483,92,46
1130,60,31

?kVk,¡% fuos'k dh fcØh ij gkfu
Less: Loss on sale of Investments
130,26,94
83,88,89

1353,65,52
1046,71,42
III.
fuos'k ds iqueZwY;u ij ykHk
Profit on revaluation of investments
1668,80,91
545,44,89

?kVk,¡% fuos'k ds iqueZwY;u ij gkfu
Less: Loss on revaluation of  investments
2331,37,28
2729,33,96

6,67,30
2,55,58
V.
fofue; ysu&nsu ij ykHk
Profit on exchange transactions
498,36,65
863,93,29

?kVk,a% fofue; ysu&nsu ij gkfu
Less: Loss on exchange transactions
32,22,17
60,28,77

VII
fofo/k vk;
Miscellaneous Income
7959,96,64
8461,44,56

**dqy@Total
      13383,53,96
         12142,53,13**

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 31.03.2024
31.03.2023 dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 31.03.2023**

**vuqlwph 15 & O;; fd;k x;k C;kt
SCHEDULE 15 - INTEREST EXPENDED**

I.
tekjkf'k;ksa ij C;kt
Interest on Deposits
62310,79,96
46845,98,85

II.
Hkkjrh; fjt+oZ cSad@varj&cSad mèkkj ij C;kt
Interest on Reserve Bank of India/Inter-bank borrowings
1289,86,25
1149,08,89

III.
vU;
Others
3217,88,99
2657,39,73

**dqy@Total
      66818,55,20
         50652,47,47**

**vuqlwph 16 & ifjpkyu O;;**

**SCHEDULE 16 - OPERATING EXPENSES**

I.
deZpkfj;ksa dks Hkqxrku vkSj muds fy, çkoèkku
Payments to and provisions for employees
18486,31,04
14810,00,57

II.
fdjk;k] dj vkSj fctyh O;oLFkk
Rent, taxes and lighting
1325,76,52
1317,88,96

III.
eqæ.k vkSj ys[ku lkexzh
Printing and stationery
169,28,55
159,39,18

IV.
foKkiu vkSj çpkj
Advertisement and publicity
93,49,05
98,19,68

V.
cSad dh laifÙk ij ewY;gzkl
Depreciation on bank’s property
895,24,94
896,55,51

VI.
funs'kdksa dh Qhl] HkÙks vkSj O;;
Directors’  fees, allowances and expenses
2,83,17
2,42,91

VII.
ys[kkijh{kdksa dh Qhl vkSj O;; ¼'kk[kk ys[kkijh{kdksa lfgr½
Auditors’  fees and expenses (including branch auditors)
43,90,34
43,49,26

VIII.
fof/k izHkkj
Law charges
141,08,88
120,74,95

IX.
iksLVst] Vsyhxzke] nwjHkk"k vkfn
Postage, Telegrams, Telephones, etc.
331,98,05
330,51,04

X.
ejEer vkSj j[kj[kko
Repairs and maintenance
795,86,16
778,79,29

XI.
chek
Insurance
1697,99,34
1550,85,81

XII.
vU; O;;
Other expenditure
4552,03,76
3996,53,69

**dqy@Total
     28535,79,80
         24105,40,85**

----

**SCHEDULE 17 :**

**SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES FOR THE FY 2023-24**

**1.	
BASIS OF PREPARATION:**

	
The financial statements have been prepared on historical 
cost basis and conform, in all material aspects, to Generally 
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) in India unless 
otherwise 
stated 
encompassing 
applicable 
statutory 
provisions, regulatory norms prescribed by Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI), circulars and guidelines issued by the Reserve 
Bank of India (‘RBI’) from time to time, Banking Regulation Act 
1949, Accounting Standards (AS) and pronouncements issued 
by The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) and 
prevailing practices in Banking industry in India.

	
In respect of foreign offices, statutory provisions and practices 
prevailing in respective foreign countries are complied with 
except as specified elsewhere.

	
The financial statements have been prepared on going 
concern basis with accrual concept and in accordance with the 
accounting policies and practices consistently followed unless 
otherwise stated.

**2.	
USE OF ESTIMATES:**

	
The preparation of financial statements requires the 
management to make estimates and assumptions considered 
in the reported amounts of assets and liabilities (including 
contingent liabilities) as on the date of the financial statements 
and the reported income and expenses for the reporting 
period. Management believes that the estimates used in 
the preparation of the financial statements are prudent and 
reasonable.

	
Future results could differ from these estimates. Difference 
between the actual results and estimates is recognized in the 
period in which the results are known / materialized.

	
Any revision to the accounting estimates is recognized 
prospectively in the current and future periods unless otherwise 
stated.

**3.	
REVENUE RECOGNITION:**

3.1	 Income & expenditure (other than items referred to in 
paragraph 3.5) are generally accounted for on accrual basis.

3.2	 Income from Non- Performing Assets (NPAs), comprising of 
advances and investments, is recognized upon realization, 
as per the prudential norms prescribed by the RBI/ respective 
country regulators in the case of foreign offices (hereafter 
collectively referred to as Regulatory Authorities).

**vuqlwph 17%**

**egRoiw.kZ ys[kkadu uhfr;ka foÙk o"kZ 2023&24**

**1-	 rS;kj djus dk vkèkkj%**

**2-	 vuqekuksa dk mi;ksx**

**3-	 jktLo fuèkkZj.k**

----

3.3	 Mode of appropriation of recovery in order of priority will be as 
below:

(a)	 Appropriation of Recoveries in NPA accounts (irrespective 
of the mode / status / stage of recovery actions) shall be 
regulated in the following order of priority:

i.	
Expenditure/Out of Pocket Expenses incurred for 
Recovery (earlier recorded in Memorandum Dues)

ii.	
Thereafter towards the interest irregularities/accrued 
interest.

iii.	
Principal irregularities i.e. NPA outstanding in the account.

	
Clarification:

	
In case of borrowers who are having multiple accounts - 
On receiving recovery in one account system appropriates 
recovery towards Expenditure, Recorded Interest and 
Principal outstanding of same account. Further, surplus 
recovery amount, if any, takes care of Expenditure, Recorded 
Interest and Principal outstanding of another account for same 
Customer.

(b)	 However, in case of Compromise, Resolution/Settlement 
through NCLT, Technically Written Off (TWO) & Credits 
received on account of CGTMSE/ECGC/GECL/CGMFU 
and subsidy if any, shall be appropriated in the order of 
Principal, Charges and interest.

(c)	 In case of suit filed/decreed accounts, recovery shall be 
appropriated as under: -

i.	
As per the directives of the concerned Court.

ii.	
In the absence of specific directives from the Court, as 
mentioned at point (a) above.

	
Any exceptions to the above may be considered by HOCAC-III 
(for    proposals falling under the powers of various committee’s 
up to HOCAC-III & Management Committee for proposals 
under its vested powers.

3.4	 The sale of NPA is accounted as per guidelines prescribed by 
RBI and as disclosed under Para 5.3.

3.5	 Commission (excluding on Government Business, Insurance 
Business, Mutual Fund Business, Letter of Credit and 
Bank Guarantee), exchange, locker rent and Income on 
Rupee Derivatives designated as ‘Trading’ are accounted 
for on realization and insurance claims are accounted for 
on settlement. Interest on overdue inland bills is accounted 
for on realization and interest on overdue foreign bill, till its 
crystallization is accounted for on crystallization and thereafter 
on realization.

3.6	 In case of suit ﬁled accounts, related legal and other expenses 
incurred are charged to Proﬁt & Loss Account and on recovery, 
the same are accounted for as such.

3.7	 Income from interest on refund of income tax is accounted for 
in the year the order is passed by the concerned authority.

3-3	çkFkfedrk ds Øe esa olwyh ds fofu;ksx dk rjhdk fuEukuqlkj 
gksxk%

	
II-	
blds ckn vçkIr@mifpr C;kt  ds fy, 

	
III-	 çeq[k vfu;ferrk,a vFkkZr~ [kkrs esa cdk;k ,uih, 

**Li"Vhdj.k%**

**¼lh½	okn nk;j@fMØh [kkrksa ds ekeys esa] olwyh fuEukuqlkj 
fofu;ksftr dh tk,xh%**

	
i.	
lacafèkr U;k;ky; ds funsZ'kkuqlkjA

----

3.8	 Lease payments including cost escalation for assets taken on 
operating lease are recognized in the Profit and Loss Account 
over the lease term in accordance with the AS 19 (Leases) 
issued by ICAI.

3.9	 Provision for Reward Points on Credit cards is made based on 
the accumulated outstanding points in each category.

3.10	If Term Deposit (TD) matures and proceeds are unpaid, the 
amount left unclaimed with the bank attracts rate of interest as 
applicable to savings account or the contracted rate of interest 
on the matured TD, whichever is lower.

3.11	Dividend (excluding Interim Dividend) is accounted for as and 
when the right to receive the dividend is established.

4.	
INVESTMENTS:

4.1	 The transactions in Securities are recorded on ‘Settlement 
Date’.

4.2	 Investments are classified into six categories as stipulated in 
Form A of the Third Schedule to the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949.

4.3	 Investments have been categorized into ‘Held to Maturity’, 
‘Available for Sale’ and ‘Held for Trading’ in terms of RBI 
guidelines as under:

(a)	 Securities acquired by the Bank with an intention to hold 
till maturity are classified under ‘Held to Maturity’.

(b)	 The securities acquired by the Bank with an intention to 
trade by taking advantages of short-term price/ interest 
rate movements are classified under ‘Held for Trading’.

(c)	 The securities, which do not fall within the above two 
categories, are classified under ‘Available for Sale’.

4.4	 Investments in subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates are 
classified as HTM.

4.5	 Transfer of securities from AFS / HFT category to HTM 
category is made at the lower of book value or market value.

	
Provided that where the market value is higher than the book 
value at the time of transfer, the appreciation shall be ignored, 
and the security shall be transferred at the book value.

	
Provided further that in cases where the market value is lower 
than the book value, the provision for depreciation held against 
the security (including the additional provision, if any, required 
based on valuation done on the date of transfer) shall be 
adjusted to reduce the book value to the market value and the 
security shall be transferred at the market value.

	
However, transfer of securities from HTM category to AFS 
category is carried out on book value. After transfer, these 
securities are immediately revalued and resultant depreciation, 
if any, is provided.

**4-	 fuos'k**

----

4.6	 In determining acquisition cost of an investment:

(a)	 Brokerage, commission, Securities Transaction Tax (STT), 
etc., paid in connection with acquisition of securities are 
treated as revenue expenses upfront and excluded from 
cost.

(b)	 Interest accrued up to the date of acquisition/sale of 
securities, i.e., broken- period interest is excluded from 
the acquisition cost/sale consideration and the same is 
accounted as interest accrued but not due.

(c)	 Cost is determined on the weighted average cost method 
for all categories of investments.

4.7	 Investments are valued as per RBI/ FIMMDA guidelines, on 
the following basis:

	
Held to Maturity

(i)	
Investments under ‘Held to Maturity’ category are carried 
at acquisition cost.

	
Wherever the book value is higher than the face value/
redemption value, the premium is amortized over the 
remaining period to maturity on straight line basis. Such 
amortization of premium is reflected in Interest Earned 
under the head ‘Income on investments’ as a deduction.

(ii)	 Investments in subsidiaries/joint ventures/associates 
are valued at carrying cost less diminution, other than 
temporary in nature for each investment individually.

(iii)	 Investments in sponsored regional rural banks are valued 
at carrying cost.

(iv)	 Investment in Venture Capital is valued at carrying cost.

(v)	 Equity shares held in HTM category are valued at carrying 
cost.

Available for Sale and Held for Trading:

(a)
Govt. Securities

I.	 Central Govt. 
Securities
At market prices/YTM as published by Fixed 
Income Money Market and Derivatives 
Association of India (FIMMDA) / Financial 
Benchmark India Pvt. Ltd (FBIL).

II.	State Govt. 
Securities
On appropriate yield to maturity basis as per 
FIMMDA/RBI guidelines.

(b)
Securities 
guaranteed by 
Central / State 
Government, 
PSU Bonds (not 
in the nature of 
advances)

On appropriate yield to maturity basis as per 
FIMMDA/RBI guidelines.

(c)
Treasury Bills
At carrying cost

**ifjiDork rd èkkfjr %**

	
¼iv½	 m|e iwath esa fuos'kksa dk ewY;kadu j[kko ykxr ij fd;k x;k 
gSA

**fcØh gsrq miyCèk vkSj O;kikj gsrq èkkfjr %**

¼lh½
Vªst+jh fcy
j[kko ykxr ij

----

(d)
Equity shares
At market price, if quoted, otherwise at 
breakup value of the Shares as per latest 
Balance Sheet. (The date as on which the 
latest balance sheet is drawn up shall not 
precede the date of valuation by more than 
18 months), otherwise at Re.1 per company.

(e)
Preference 
shares
At market price, if quoted, or on appropriate 
yield to maturity basis not exceeding 
redemption value as per RBI/FIMMDA 
guidelines.

(f)
Bonds and 
debentures (not 
in the nature of 
advances)

At market price, if quoted, or on appropriate 
yield to maturity basis as per RBI/FIMMDA 
guidelines.

(g)
Units of mutual 
funds
As per stock exchange quotation, if quoted; 
at repurchase price/NAV, if unquoted.

(h)
Commercial 
Paper
At carrying cost.

(i)
Certificate of 
Deposits
At carrying cost.

(j)
Security receipts
Investments by lenders in SRs (Security 
Receipts) / other securities issued by ARCs 
(Asset Reconstruction Companies) shall 
be valued periodically by reckoning the Net 
Asset Value (NAV) declared by the ARC 
based on the recovery ratings received for 
such instruments.

The Bank shall carry the investment in its 
books, on an ongoing basis until its transfer 
or its realization, at lower of redemption 
value of SRs arrived based on NAV, and 
the Net Book Value (NBV) of the transferred 
stressed loan at the time of transfer.

If the investment by the transferor (Bank) in 
SRs issued against loans transferred by it 
is more than 10 percent of all SRs issued 
against the transferred asset, then the 
valuation of the SRs on the books of the 
transferor shall be the lower of the following:

i)	 Net Asset Value (NAV) declared by the 
ARC based on the recovery ratings 
received for such instruments; and

ii)	 Face value of the SRs reduced by the 
notional provisioning rate applicable if 
the loans had continued on the books of 
the bank.

(k)
Venture Capital 
Funds
At net asset value (NAV) declared by the 
VCF.

(l)
Other 
Investments
At carrying cost less diminution in value.

----

	
The above valuation in category of Available for Sale and 
Held for Trading is done scrip wise on quarterly basis and 
depreciation/appreciation is aggregated for each classification. 
Net depreciation for each classification, if any, is provided for 
while net appreciation is ignored. On provision for depreciation, 
the book value of the individual security remains unchanged 
after marking to market.

	
Investments in sponsored regional rural banks shall be valued 
at carrying cost irrespective of Category (HTM & AFS).

4.8	 Investments are subject to appropriate provisioning/ de-
recognition of income, in line with the prudential norms of 
Reserve Bank of India for NPI classification. The depreciation/
provision in respect of non-performing securities is not set off 
against the appreciation in respect of the other performing 
securities.

	
If any credit facility availed by an entity is NPA in the books of the 
Bank, investment in any of the securities issued by the same 
entity would also be treated as NPI and vice versa. However, 
in respect of NPI preference share where the dividend is not 
paid, the corresponding credit facility is not treated as NPA.

	
In case of securities, i.e., bonds, debentures, etc., where the 
credit facilities are availed by the borrowers, the provision has 
been made on the basis of YTM or IRAC norms whichever is 
higher. 

4.9	 Profit or loss on sale of investments in any category is taken 
to Profit and Loss account but, in case of profit on sale of 
investments in ‘Held to Maturity’ category, an equivalent 
amount (net of taxes and amount transferred to Statutory 
Reserve) is appropriated to ‘Capital Reserve Account’, at year 
end.

	
Profit or loss on redemption of investments in AFS & HFT 
category is reflected in interest earned income on investments, 
as an addition/deduction from interest income earned.

4.10	Securities repurchased/resold under buy back arrangement 
are accounted for at original cost.

4.11	The securities sold and purchased under Repo/Reverse 
Repo are accounted as Collateralized lending and borrowing 
transactions. However, securities are transferred as in the 
case of normal outright sale/purchase transactions and such 
movement of securities is reflected using the Repo/Reverse 
Repo Accounts and Contra entries. The above entries are 
reversed on the date of maturity. Costs and revenues are 
accounted as interest expenditure/income, as the case may 
be. Balance in Repo Account is classified under schedule 4 
(Borrowings).

**4-10	okil [kjhn O;oLFkk ds vUrxZr iqu%[kjhnh@iqu% csph x;h 
çfrHkwfr;ksa dks mudh ewy ykxr ij ys[kkafdr fd;k tkrk gSA**

----

4.12	The derivatives transactions are undertaken for trading or 
hedging purposes. Trading transactions are marked to market. 
As per RBI guidelines, different categories of swaps are valued 
as under:

	
Hedge Swaps

	
Interest rate swaps with hedge interest bearing asset or 
liability are accounted for on accrual basis except the swaps 
designated with an asset or liability that are carried at lower of 
market value or cost in the financial statement.

	
Gain or losses on the termination of swaps are recognized 
over the shorter of the remaining contractual life of the swap or 
the remaining life of the asset/ liabilities.

	
Trading Swaps

	
Trading swap transactions are marked to market with changes 
recorded in the financial statements.

	
Exchange Traded Derivatives entered into for trading 
purposes are valued at prevailing market rates based on rates 
given by the Exchange and the resultant gains and losses are 
recognized in the Profit and Loss Account.

4.13	Foreign Currency Options:

	
Foreign currency options written by the Bank with a back-to-
back contract with another bank are not marked to market 
since there is no market risk.

	
Premium received is held as a liability and transferred to the 
Profit and Loss Account on maturity/cancellation.

5.	
LOANS / ADVANCES AND PROVISIONS THEREON:

5.1	 Advances are classified as performing and non-performing 
assets; provisions are made in accordance with prudential 
norms prescribed by RBI.

(a)	 Advances are classiﬁed: Standard, Sub Standard, 
Doubtful and Loss assets borrower wise.

(b)	 Advances are stated net of specific loan loss provisions, 
provision for diminution in fair value of restructured 
advances.

5.2	 In respect of foreign offices, the classification of loans and 
advances and provisions for NPAs are made as per the local 
regulations or as per the norms of RBI, whichever is more 
stringent.

	
Loans and advances held at the overseas branches that 
are identified as impaired as per host country regulations for 
reasons other than record of recovery, but which are standard 
as per the extant RBI guidelines, are classified as NPAs to the 
extent of amount outstanding in the host country.

	
cpko vnyk cnyh ¼gSt LoSi½

	
O;kikfjd vnyk cnyh ¼VªsÇMx Loki½ 

**4-13 fons'kh eqæk fodYi%**

**5-	 _.k@vfxze vkSj blds fy, çkoèkku**

----

5.3	 Financial Assets sold are recognized as under:

(a)	 Prudential norms for the transfer transactions to ARCs:

	
When the stressed loan is transferred to ARC at a price 
below the NBV at the time of transfer, the Bank has 
debited the shortfall to the profit and loss account for the 
year in which the transfer has taken place. Banks are 
permitted to use countercyclical or floating provisions for 
meeting any shortfall on transfer of stressed loan when 
the transfer is at a price below the NBV.

	
On the other hand, when the stressed loan is transferred 
to an ARC for a value higher than the NBV at the time 
of transfer, lenders shall reverse the excess provision 
on transfer to the profit and loss account in the year 
the amounts are received and only when the sum of 
cash received by way of initial consideration and / or 
redemption or transfer of Security Receipts (SR) / Pass 
Through Certificates (PTCs)/ other securities issued by 
ARCs is higher than the NBV of the loan at the time of 
transfer. Further, such reversal are limited to the extent to 
which cash received exceeds the NBV of the loan at the 
time of transfer”

(b)	 Prudential norms for the transfer transactions to 
transferee(s) other than ARCs - Provisioning norms:

i. 	
When the bank transfers its NPAs to transferee(s) other 
than ARCs, the same are removed from the books on 
receipt of the entire transfer consideration. 

ii. 	
If the transfer to transferee(s) other than ARCs is at a price 
below the net NBV at the time of transfer, the shortfall is 
debited to the profit and loss account of the year in which 
transfer has taken place.

iii.	
If the sale consideration is for a value higher than the NBV 
at the time of transfer, the excess provisions has been 
reversed.

(c)	 The excess amount received, if any, over & above 
memoranda dues is credited proportionately to the 
respective heads of Income Interest on Loans and 
Advances say Income Interest on CC/ Term Loan, etc. 

	
In case, the excess amount is to be returned subsequently 
due to, e.g., DRT/Court orders or any other eventuality, 
the same head is debited to refund the excess amount 
recovered.

5.4	 Restructured Assets:

	
For restructured/rescheduled advances, provisions are made 
in accordance with guidelines issued by RBI from time to time. 
Provision for diminution in fair value of restructured advances is 
measured at net present value terms as per RBI guidelines for 
accounts where total dues to the bank are Rupees One Crore 
and above. For other accounts, the provision for diminution in 
fair value is computed notionally at 5% of total exposure to the 
bank as per RBI guidelines.

5-4	iqu%lajfpr vkfLr;ka %

----

5.5	 In addition to the specific provision on NPAs, general 
provisions are also made for standard assets as per extant 
RBI Guidelines. These provisions are reflected in Schedule 
5 of the Balance Sheet under the head ‘Other Liabilities & 
Provisions – Others’ and are not considered for arriving at the 
Net NPAs.

5.6	 Amounts recovered against debts written-off in earlier years 
and provisions no longer considered necessary in the context 
of the current status of the borrower are recognized in the 
profit and loss account.

5.7	 Provision for Country Exposure:

	
In addition to the specific provisions held according to the 
asset classification status, provisions are also made for 
individual country exposures (other than the home country). 
Countries are categorized into seven risk categories, namely, 
insignificant, low, moderately low, moderate, moderately high, 
high and very high, and provisioning made as per extant RBI 
guidelines. If the country exposure (net) of the Bank in respect 
of each country does not exceed 1% of the total funded assets, 
no provision is maintained on such country exposures. The 
provision is reflected in Schedule 5 of the Balance Sheet under 
the ‘Other Liabilities & Provisions – Others’.

5.8	 An additional provision of 2% (in addition to country risk 
provision that is applicable to all overseas exposures) against 
standard assets representing all exposures to step down 
subsidiaries of Indian Corporates has been made to cover the 
additional risk arising from complexity in the structure, location 
of different intermediary entities in different jurisdictions 
exposing the Indian Company, and hence the Bank, to a 
greater political and regulatory risk. (As per RBI Cir.No. RBI/ 
2015.16/279 DBR. IBD.BC No. 68/ 23.37.001/ 2015-16 dated 
31.12.2015).

6.	
PROPERTY, PLANT & EQUIPMENT:

6.1	 Property, Plant & Equipment are stated at historical cost less 
accumulated depreciation/amortization, wherever applicable, 
except those premises, which have been revalued. The 
appreciation on revaluation is credited to revaluation reserve 
and incremental depreciation attributable to the revalued 
amount is deducted there from.

6.2	 Software is capitalized and clubbed under Intangible assets.

6.3	 Cost includes cost of purchase and all expenditure such as 
site preparation, installation costs and professional fees 
incurred on the asset till the time of capitalization. Subsequent 
expenditure/s incurred on the assets are capitalized only 
when it increases the future benefits from such assets or their 
functioning capability.

5-7	daVªh ,D‍likst+j ds fy, çkoèkku

**6-	 laifÙk] la;a= vkSj midj.k**

----

**6.4	 Depreciation:**

A.	
Depreciation on assets (including land where value is not 
separable) is provided on straight-line method based on 
estimated life of the asset, except in respect of computers 
where it is calculated on the straight-line method, at the rates 
prescribed by RBI.

B.	
Depreciation on assets has been provided at the rates 
furnished below: -

Particulars
Rate of Depreciation

PREMISES

Freehold Properties

Land
NIL

Depreciation to be provided on Construction 
Cost where the land cost is segregated and 
on total cost where the land cost is not 
ascertainable and cannot be segregated

2.50% 
(40 
years 
Straight Line Method 
or 
remaining 
life 
whichever is lower)

Land acquired on perpetual lease where no 
lease period is mentioned
NIL

Land acquired on lease where lease period 
is mentioned
Over lease period

Building

Constructed on free hold land and on 
leased land, where lease period is above 
40 years

2.50%

Constructed on leased land where lease 
period is below 40 years
Over lease period

FIXED ASSETS EXCEPT PREMISES

Furniture and fixtures- Steel articles
5.00%

Furniture and fixtures-wooden articles
10.00%

Mattresses
20.00%

Mobile Phone Instruments
33.33%

Machinery, electrical and miscellaneous 
articles
15.00%

Motor cars and cycles
15.00%

Computers, ATMs and related items, 
Laptop, I- pad, etc., Servers, Network, 
Equipment & Automated Teller Machines 
(Including software forming an integral part 
of computer hardware)

33.33%

Items of office fixed assets amounting less than Rs. 25,000/- 
and/or having useful life of less than 12 months from the date 
of acquisition are recognized as expense (except to staff, items 
costing more than Rs. 1,500/- which can be separately used). 
Assets costing less than Rs. 1,500/- each are depreciated@100% 
in the year of purchase.

Cost of Application Software / Operating System / Data base 
amounting up to Rs. 25,000/- are charged to revenue.

C.	
Depreciation on fresh additions to assets other than Bank’s 
own premises is provided from the day in which the assets are 
capitalized and in the case of assets sold/disposed-off during 
the year, up to the date in which it is sold/ disposed-off, i.e., 
daily basis.

**6-4	ewY‍;ºzkl**

**ch-	 ,slh vkfLr;ksa ij ewY;ºzkl fuEufyf[kr njksa ij fd;k x;k gS %**

33.33%

----

D.	
The depreciation on bank’s own premises existing at the close 
of the year is charged for full year. The construction cost is 
depreciated only when the building is complete in all respects. 
Where the cost of land and building cannot be separately 
ascertained, depreciation is provided on the composite cost, 
at the rate applicable to buildings.

E.	
In respect of leasehold premises, the lease premium, if any, 
is amortized over the period of lease and the lease rent is 
charged in the respective year(s).

F.	
The Revalued assets is depreciated over the balance useful 
life of the asset as assessed at the time of revaluation.

**7.	
IMPAIRMENT OF ASSETS:**

	
The carrying costs of assets are reviewed at each Balance 
Sheet date if there is any indication of impairment based on 
internal/external factors, an impairment loss is recognized 
wherever the carrying cost of an asset exceeds its recoverable 
amount. The recoverable amount is the greater of the assets 
net selling price and value in use. In assessing value in use, 
the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present 
value using a pre-tax discount rate that reflects current market 
assessments of the time value of money and risks specific to 
the asset.

	
After impairment, if any, depreciation is provided on the 
revised carrying cost of the asset over its remaining useful 
life. A previously recognized impairment loss is increased or 
reversed depending on changes in circumstances. However, 
the carrying value after reversal is not increased beyond the 
carrying value that would have prevailed by charging usual 
depreciation if there was no impairment.

**8.	
EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS:**

**PROVIDENT FUND:**

	
Provident fund is a defined contribution scheme as the Bank 
pays fixed contribution at pre-determined rates. The obligation 
of the Bank is limited to such fixed contribution. The contribution 
is charged to Profit & Loss A/c.

	
GRATUITY:

	
Gratuity liability is a defined benefit obligation and is provided 
for on the basis of an actuarial valuation. The scheme is funded 
by the Bank and is managed by a separate trust.

	
PENSION:

	
Pension liability is a defined benefit obligation and is provided 
for on the basis of an actuarial valuation. The scheme is funded 
by the Bank and is managed by a separate trust.

	
The Bank operates a New Pension Scheme (NPS) for all 
officers/ employees who have joined the Bank on or after 
01.04.2010. As per the scheme, the covered employees 
contribute 10% of their basic pay plus dearness allowance to 
the scheme together with contribution of 14% of their basic pay 

**7-	 vkfLr;ksa dh vilkekU;rk**

**8-	 deZpkjh ykHk 
	
Hkfo"; fufèk**

**minku**

**isa'ku**

----

plus dearness allowance from the Bank. Pending completion 
of the registration procedures of the employees concerned, 
these contributions are retained. The Bank recognizes such 
annual contributions as an expense in the year to which they 
relate. Upon the receipt of the Permanent Retirement Account 
Number (PRAN), the consolidated contribution amounts are 
transferred to the NPS Trust.

	
COMPENSATED ABSENCES:

	
Accumulating compensated absences such as Privilege 
Leave (PL) and Sick Leave (including unavailed casual leave) 
are provided for based on actuarial valuation. The scheme for 
Privilege Leave (PL) is funded by the Bank and is managed by 
a separate trust.

	
OTHER EMPLOYEE BENEFITS:

	
Other Employee Benefits such as Leave Fare Concession 
(LFC), Silver Jubilee Award, etc., are provided for based on 
actuarial valuation. 

	
In respect of overseas branches and offices, the benefits 
in respect of employees other than those on deputation 
are valued and accounted for as per laws prevailing in the 
respective countries.

	
The valuation method used for defined benefit obligations for 
employee benefits is ‘Projected Unit Credit Method’.

**9.	
TRANSLATION OF FOREIGN CURRENCY TRANSACTIONS 
& BALANCES:**

	
Transactions involving foreign exchange are accounted for 
in accordance with AS 11, ‘The Effect of Changes in Foreign 
Exchange Rates’.

9.1	 Except advances of erstwhile London branches which are 
accounted for at the exchange rate prevailing on the date 
of parking in India, all other monetary assets and liabilities, 
guarantees, acceptances, endorsements and other obligations 
are translated in Indian Rupee equivalent at the exchange 
rates prevailing as on the Balance Sheet date as per Foreign 
Exchange Dealers’ Association of India (FEDAI) guidelines.

9.2	 Non-monetary items other than fixed assets which are carried 
at historical cost are translated at exchange rate prevailing on 
the date of transaction.

9.3	 Outstanding Forward exchange spot and forward contracts are 
translated as on the Balance Sheet date at the rates notified 
by FEDAI and the resultant gain/loss on translation is taken to 
Profit & Loss Account.

	
Foreign exchange spot/forward contracts/deals (Merchant and 
Inter-bank) which are not intended for trading/Merchant Hedge 
and are outstanding on the Balance Sheet date, are reverse 
re-valued at the closing FEDAI spot/forward rate in order to 
remove revaluation effect on exchange profit. The premium or 

**{kfriwÆr vuqifLFkfr;ka**

**vU; deZpkjh ykHk**

**9-	 fons'kh eqæk ls lacafèkr ysunsuksa dk ifjorZu vkSj 'ks"k**

**fons'kh fofue; esa 'kkfey ysunsu ys[kkekud 11 **fons'kh fofue; 
njksa esa ifjorZu dk çHkko** ds vuqlkj ys[kkafdr fd, tkrs gSaA**

----

discount arising at the inception of such a forward exchange 
contract is amortized as interest expense or income over the 
life of the contract.

**9.4	 Income and expenditure items are accounted for at the 
exchange rate prevailing on the date of transaction.**

	
Exchange differences arising on the settlement of monetary 
items at rates different from those at which they were initially 
recorded are recognized as income or as expense in the 
period in which they arise.

	
Gains/Losses on account of changes in exchange rates of 
open position in currency futures trades are settled with the 
exchange clearing house on daily basis and such gains/losses 
are recognized in the Profit and Loss Account.

**9.5	 Offices outside India / Offshore Banking Units:**

(i)	
Operations of foreign branches and off shore banking unit are 
classified as ‘Non-integral foreign operations’ and operations 
of representative offices abroad are classified as ‘integral 
foreign operations’.

(ii)	 Foreign currency transactions of integral foreign operations 
and non-integral foreign operations are accounted for as 
prescribed by AS-11.

(iii)	 Exchange Fluctuation resulting into Profit / loss of non-integral 
operations is credited /debited to Exchange Fluctuation 
Reserve.

**10.	 TAXES ON INCOME**

	
Income tax expense is the aggregate amount of current tax 
including Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT), wherever applicable 
and deferred tax expense incurred by the Bank. The current 
tax and deferred tax are determined in accordance with the 
provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and as per Accounting 
Standard 22 - Accounting for Taxes on Income respectively 
after taking into account taxes paid at the foreign offices, which 
are based on the tax laws of respective jurisdictions.

	
MAT credit is recognized as an asset only when and to the 
extent there is convincing evidence that there will be payment 
of normal income tax during the period specified under the 
income Tax Act, 1961.

	
Deferred Tax adjustments comprises of changes in the 
deferred tax assets or liabilities during the year. Deferred tax 
assets and liabilities are recognized by considering the impact 
of timing differences between taxable income and accounting 
income for the current year, and carry forward losses. Deferred 
tax assets and liabilities are measured using tax rates and 
tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at 
the balance sheet date. The impact of changes in deferred 
tax assets and liabilities is recognized in the profit and loss 

**9-4	vk; rFkk O;; dh ensa ysu&nsu dh rkjh[k dks çpfyr 
fons'kh fofue; nj ij ifjoÆrr dh tkrh gSaA**

**9-5	fons'kh 'kk[kk,a@virVh; cSaÇdx bdkb;ka%**

**10-	vk; ij dj**

----

account. Deferred tax assets are recognized and re-assessed 
at each reporting date, based upon management’s judgment 
as to whether their realization is considered as reasonably/
virtually certain.

**11.	 EARNINGS PER SHARE:**

	
The Bank reports basic and diluted earnings per share in 
accordance with AS 20 - ‘Earnings per Share’ issued by the 
ICAI. Basic Earnings per Share is computed by dividing the Net 
Profit after Tax for the year attributable to equity shareholders 
by the weighted average number of equity shares outstanding 
for the year.

	
Diluted Earnings per Share reflects the potential dilution that 
could occur if securities or other contracts to issue equity 
shares were exercised or converted during the year. Diluted 
Earnings per Share is computed using the weighted average 
number of equity shares and dilutive potential equity shares 
outstanding.

**12.	 PROVISIONS, 
CONTINGENT 
LIABILITIES 
AND 
CONTINGENT ASSETS:**

	
In conformity with AS 29, ‘Provisions, Contingent Liabilities 
and Contingent Assets’, issued by the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of India, the Bank recognizes provisions only 
when it has a present obligation as a result of a past event, and 
it is probable that outflow of resources embodying economic 
benefits will be required to settle the obligation, and when a 
reliable estimate of the amount of the obligation can be made.

	
A Contingent Liability is a potential liability, in terms of money, 
which may arise depending on the outcome of an uncertain 
specific event. A possible obligation which may or may not 
arise depending on how a future event unfolds has been 
recognized as Contingent Liability.

	
Further, the cases which although have been filed against the 
Bank, but possibility of any obligation arising upon the Bank in 
those case is remote, have not been construed and included 
in Contingent Liability.

	
Contingent Assets are not recognized in the financial 
statements.

**13.	 BULLION TRANSACTIONS:**

	
The Bank imports bullion including precious metal bars on a 
consignment basis for selling to its customers. The imports 
are typically on a back-to-back basis and are priced to the 
customer based on price quoted by the supplier. The Bank 
earns a fee on such bullion transactions.

	
The fee is classified under commission income. The Bank also 
accepts deposits and lends gold, which is treated as deposits/
advances as the case may be with the interest paid / received 
classified as interest expense/income.

**gksrh gS fd D;k mudh olwyh ;Fkksfpr@opqZvyh fuf'pr ekuh 
xÃ gSaA**

**11-	çfr 'ks;j vk;**

**forh; fooj.kh esa vkdfLed vkfLr;ksa dks ugÈ fy;k tkrk gSA**

**13-	cqfy;u VªkatsD'ku%**

----

14.	 SEGMENT REPORTING:

	
The Bank recognizes the Business segment as the Primary 
reporting segment and Geographical segment as the 
Secondary reporting segment, in accordance with the RBI 
guidelines and in compliance with the Accounting Standard 17 
issued by ICAI.

15.	 The Bank, in accordance with RBI Circular FIDD.CO.Plan.
BC.23/ 04.09.01/ 2015-16 dated April 7, 2016, trades in Priority 
Sector portfolio by selling or buying PSLC. There is no transfer 
of risks or loan assets in these transactions. The fee paid for 
purchase of the PSLC is treated as an ‘Expense’ and the Fee 
received from sale of PSLCs is treated as ‘Other Income’.

16.	 CASH & CASH EQUIVALENTS

	
Cash and cash equivalents include:

a)	
Cash and Balances with RBI, Balances with Bank and money 
at call and short notice.

b)	
The balances in Reverse Repo are reported as per the 
guidelines provided by RBI vide its circular dated 19.05.2022, 
(i.e., under schedule 6, schedule 7 and schedule 9, as 
applicable). The balance held by the Bank under Standing 
Deposit Facility (SDF) is also reported similarly.

14-	[kaMokj fjiksÉVx% 

16-	udn vkSj udn lerqY;

	
udn vkSj udn lerqY; esa 'kkfey gS%& 

----

**SCHEDULE 18: NOTES TO ACCOUNTS (STANDALONE) – 
31.03.2024**

**1.	
Regulatory Capital**

**1. 	 a)      Composition of Regulatory Capital**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Sr. 
No.
Particulars
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year**

i)
Common Equity Tier 1 capital 
(CET 1)
(net of deductions, if any)

81187.00
73927.95 

ii)
Additional Tier 1 capital
15698.26
9677.73 
iii)
Tier 1 capital (i + ii)
96885.26
83605.67
iv)
Tier 2 capital
20581.01
18551.14 
v)
Total capital (Tier 1+Tier 2)
117466.27
102156.81 
vi)
Total Risk Weighted Assets 
(RWAs)
735434.54
658981.51 

vii)
CET 1 Ratio (CET 1 as a 
percentage of RWAs)
11.04%
11.22%

viii)
Tier 1 Ratio (Tier 1 capital as a 
percentage of RWAs)
13.17%
12.69%

ix)
Tier 2 Ratio (Tier 2 capital as a 
percentage of RWAs)
2.80%
2.81%

x)
Capital to Risk Weighted 
Assets Ratio (CRAR) (Total 
Capital as a percentage of 
RWAs)

15.97%
15.50%

xi)
Leverage Ratio
5.95%
4.75%
xii)
Percentage of the shareholding 
of Government of India
73.15%
73.15%

xiii)
Amount of paid-up equity 
capital raised during the Year 
Nil
Nil

xiv)
Amount of non-equity Tier 1 
capital raised during the year,
of which:
a)	
Basel III compliant 
Perpetual Non-Cumulative 
Preference Shares,
b)	
Basel III compliant 
Perpetual Debt 
Instruments

6012.00

Nil

6012.00

4214.00

Nil

4214.00

xv)
Amount of Tier 2 capital raised 
during the year, of which Basel 
III compliant:
a)	
Debt Capital Instruments 
as Tier 2 Capital 
b)	
Perpetual Cumulative 
Preference Shares 
c)	
Redeemable Non-
Cumulative Preference 
Shares
d)	
Redeemable Cumulative 
Preference Shares

3090.00

3090.00

Nil

Nil

Nil

4000.00

4000.00

Nil

Nil

Nil

**vuqlwph 18 % ys[kksa ls lacaf/kr fVIif.k;ka ¼,dy½ &  
31-03-2024**

81187.00
73927.95 

ii)
vfrfjä fV;j 1 iwath
15698.26
9677.73 

iii)
fV;j 1 iwath (i + ii)
96885.26
83605.67

iv)
fV;j 2 iwath
20581.01
18551.14 

v)
dqy iwath ¼fV;j 1$fV;j 2½
117466.27
102156.81 

vi)
dqy tksf[ke Hkkfjr vkfLr;ka 
¼vkjMCY;w,½

735434.54
658981.51 

11.04%
11.22%

viii)
fV;j 1 vuqikr ¼vkjMCY;w, ds 
çfr'kr ds :i esa Vh;j 1 iwath½

13.17%
12.69%

ix)
fV;j 2 vuqikr ¼vkjMCY;w, ds 
çfr'kr ds :i esa Vh;j 2 iwath½

2.80%
2.81%

15.97%
15.50%

xi)
yhojst vuqikr
5.95%
4.75%

xii)
Hkkjr ljdkj dh 'ks;jèkkfjrk dk 
çfr'kr

73.15%
73.15%

6012.00

**'kwU;**

6012.00

4214.00

**'kwU;**

4214.00

3090.00

3090.00

**'kwU;
'kwU;**

**'kwU;**

4000.00

4000.00

**'kwU;
'kwU;**

**'kwU;**

----

**RBI vide circular no. DOR.CAP.REC.15/21.06.201/2023-24 dated 
May 12, 2023 has given discretion to banks to consider Revaluation 
Reserve, Foreign Currency Translation Reserve and Deferred Tax 
Asset for purpose of computation of Capital Adequacy as CET-
1 capital ratio. The Bank has exercised the option in the above 
computation.**

**Note: CET 1 Capital includes Amalgamation Reserve of `9268.29 Crore**

**1.    b)	
Draw down from Reserves
 (Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Sr. No.
Reserves
Amount drawn
Purpose**

**1.
Exchange 
Fluctuation Reserve
0.00
(285.18)**

**2.
Revaluation 
Reserves
1.22
(376.01)
Reduction in 
carrying cost 
of revalued 
property**

**2.	
Asset liability management**

**2.	
a) 	 Maturity Pattern of certain items of assets and  
               liabilities**

Deposits
Advances
Investments
(Gross)
Borro- 
wings
Foreign 
Currency 
assets

**Foreign 
Currency 
liabilities**

Day 1
21771.17
3654.28
0.00
50.56
2983.29
1208.07

(13519.24)
(9979.58)
(0.00)
(977.62)
(11891.37)
(34928.02)

2 to 7 days
37650.59
5721.96
324.93
500.08
4513.36
3728.19

(26725.83)
(14502.50)
(1026.87)
(780.65)
(4268.95)
(3853.94)

8 to 14 days
37146.10
13806.14
199.50
181.52
86.93
1564.36

(25535.79)
(14875.09)
(2588.48)
(629.81)
(2188.94)
(1840.57)

15 to 30 
Days
34448.16
35042.51
1423.82
0.00
8677.93
10389.14

(46173.15)
(70595.39)
(2110.34)
(1643.40)
(4693.79)
(6088.86)

31 days to  
2 months
38878.58
66321.11
2876.98
210.93
6208.87
6346.10

(40611.38)
(48231.89)
(4646.06)
(1168.67)
(11128.81)
(10476.81)

Over 2 
months and 
up to  
3 months

30851.88
55582.74
1183.85
1066.56
6347.57
5015.51

(37209.54)
(44123.99)
(1694.28)
(1886.67)
(5410.40)
(7012.05)

Over 3 
months and 
up to  
6 Months

70675.55
80195.75
2564.08
2223.18
16448.96
16028.15

(68095.19)
(59038.95)
(2198.18)
(1275.63)
(10504.41)
(7216.06)

Over 6 
months and 
up to 1 year

156010.44
79092.74
6405.17
10170.42
5670.58
11490.48

(106622.66)
(55635.62)
(9592.29)
(5960.44)
(10998.42)
(7372.68)

Over 1 year 
and up to 3 
years

181583.02
318831.17
54353.29
4406.28
16368.25
12016.00

(164915.71)
(170774.92)
(33549.94)
(15153.45)
(19260.06)
(12588.81)

Over 3 years 
and up to 5 
years

393399.82
101720.59
60741.11
826.99
6084.24
5056.52

(392696.69)
(222016.97)
(54102.41)
(17.47)
(13796.90)
(5875.23)

Over 5 years
367297.49
174461.60
298928.80
30793.34
2453.11
2483.16

(359057.92)
(121059.08)
(293921.72)
(21797.92)
(2012.79)
(2283.10)

**Total
1369712.81
934430.59
429001.54
50429.85
75843.08
75325.67**

**(1281163.11)
(830833.98)
(405430.57)
(51291.73)
(96154.84)
(99536.14)**

**uksV% lhÃVh 1 iwath esa `9268-29 djksM+ #i;s dk lekesyu fuf/k;ka 'kkfey gSA**

**Ø-la- çkjf{kr fufèk
vkgfjr jkf'k
ç;kstu**

**1-
,Dlpsat 
mrkj& 
p<+ko fjt+oZ**

**0.00
(285.18)**

**2-
iquewZY;kadu fufèk
1.22
(376.01)
iquewZY;kafdr laifÙk 
dh ogu ykxr esa 
deh**

**2-	 vkfLr ns;rk çcaèku**

**¼jkf'k ₹ djksM+ esa½**

**tekjkf'k;k¡
vfxze
fuos'k 
¼ldy½
m/kkj
fons'kh 
eqæk 
vkfLr;ka**

**fons'kh 
eqæk 
ns;rk,a**

1 fnu
21771.17
3654.28
0.00
50.56
2983.29
1208.07

(13519.24)
(9979.58)
(0.00)
(977.62)
(11891.37)
(34928.02)

**2 ls 7 
fnu**

37650.59
5721.96
324.93
500.08
4513.36
3728.19

(26725.83)
(14502.50)
(1026.87)
(780.65)
(4268.95)
(3853.94)

**8 ls 14 
fnu**

37146.10
13806.14
199.50
181.52
86.93
1564.36

(25535.79)
(14875.09)
(2588.48)
(629.81)
(2188.94)
(1840.57)

**15 ls 30 
fnu**

34448.16
35042.51
1423.82
0.00
8677.93
10389.14

(46173.15)
(70595.39)
(2110.34)
(1643.40)
(4693.79)
(6088.86)

**31 fnu ls 
2 ekg**

38878.58
66321.11
2876.98
210.93
6208.87
6346.10

(40611.38)
(48231.89)
(4646.06)
(1168.67)
(11128.81)
(10476.81)

**2 ekg ls 
vfèkd vkSj 
3 ekg rd**

30851.88
55582.74
1183.85
1066.56
6347.57
5015.51

(37209.54)
(44123.99)
(1694.28)
(1886.67)
(5410.40)
(7012.05)

**3 ekg ls 
vfèkd vkSj 
6 ekg rd**

70675.55
80195.75
2564.08
2223.18
16448.96
16028.15

(68095.19)
(59038.95)
(2198.18)
(1275.63)
(10504.41)
(7216.06)

**6 ekg ls 
vfèkd vkSj 
1 o"kZ rd**

156010.44
79092.74
6405.17
10170.42
5670.58
11490.48

(106622.66)
(55635.62)
(9592.29)
(5960.44)
(10998.42)
(7372.68)

**1 o"kZ ls 
vfèkd vkSj 
3 o"kZ rd**

181583.02
318831.17
54353.29
4406.28
16368.25
12016.00

(164915.71)
(170774.92)
(33549.94)
(15153.45)
(19260.06)
(12588.81)

**3 o"kZ ls 
vfèkd vkSj 
5 o"kZ rd**

393399.82
101720.59
60741.11
826.99
6084.24
5056.52

(392696.69)
(222016.97)
(54102.41)
(17.47)
(13796.90)
(5875.23)

**5 o"kZ ls 
vfèkd**

367297.49
174461.60
298928.80
30793.34
2453.11
2483.16

(359057.92)
(121059.08)
(293921.72)
(21797.92)
(2012.79)
(2283.10)

**dqy
1369712.81
934430.59
429001.54
50429.85
75843.08
75325.67**

**(1281163.11)
(830833.98)
(405430.57)
(51291.73)
(96154.84)
(99536.14)**

----

**2	
b)	 Liquidity coverage ratio (LCR)**

**QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURE ON LIQUIDITY COVERAGE 
RATIO**

The bank has implemented RBI guidelines on Liquidity Coverage 
Ratio (LCR) from 1st January 2015. 

The LCR standard aims to ensure that a bank maintains an 
adequate level of unencumbered High Quality Liquid Assets 
(HQLAs) that can be readily converted into cash at little/no loss of 
value to meet its liquidity needs for a 30 calendar day time horizon 
under a liquidity stress scenario.

**LCR has two components:**

i.	
The value of the stock of High Quality Liquid Assets 
(HQLA)–The Numerator.

ii.	
Total Net Cash Outflows: Total expected cash outflows 
minus Total expected cash inflows, in stress scenario, for 
the subsequent 30 calendar days - The denominator.

**Definition of LCR:**

Stock of high quality liquid assets (HQLAs)

Total net cash outflows over the next 30 calendar days
≥  100% (w.e.f 01.04.2021)
 

The LCR requirement has become binding on the banks with 
the following minimum required level as per the time-line given 
below: 	

Jan 1, 
2015
Jan 1, 
2016
Jan 1, 
2017
Jan 1, 
2018
Jan 1, 
2019

Minimum LCR
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%

For Q4 FY’2023-24, the daily average LCR was 141.61% (based 
on simple average of daily observations) at consolidated level, as 
against the regulatory requirement of 100%.

The main drivers of LCR of the bank are High Quality Liquid Assets 
(HQLAs) to meet liquidity needs of the bank at all times and basic 
funding from retail and small business customers. The retail and 
small business customer’s contribute about 67.19% of total deposit 
portfolio of the bank, which attracts low run-off factor of 5/10% as 
on 31.03.2024.

**Composition of High Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA)**

HQLAs comprises of Level 1 and Level 2 assets. Level 2 assets are 
further divided into Level 2A and Level 2B assets, keeping in view 
their marketability and price volatility.

Level-1assets are those assets which are highly liquid. For quarter 
ended March 31, 2024, the Level-1 asset of the bank includes 
Cash in Hand, Excess CRR, Government Securities in excess 
of minimum SLR, Marketable securities issued or guaranteed by 
foreign sovereign, MSF and FALLCR totalling to `3,05,815.63/- Cr 
(based on simple average of daily observations).

Level-2A & 2B assets are those assets which are less liquid and their 
weighted amount comes to `6,443.73 Cr (based on simple average 
of daily observations). Break-up of daily observation Average HQLA 
during quarter ended March 31, 2024 is given hereunder:

**2	 ch½ pyfufèk dojst vuqikr ¼,ylhvkj½**

**pyfufèk dojst vuqikr ij xq.kkRed çdVhdj.k**

**,ylhvkj ds nks ?kVd gS%**

**,ylhvkj dh ifjHkk"kk %**

1 tuojh] 
2015
1 tuojh] 
2016
1 tuojh] 
2017
1 tuojh] 
2018
1 tuojh] 
2019
U;wure 
,ylhvkj
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%

----

**High Quality Liquid Assets (HQLAs)
Average 
%age 
contribution 
to HQLA**

**Level 1 Assets**

Cash in hand
1.46%

Excess CRR balance
0.77%

Government Securities in excess of minimum 
SLR requirement
22.39%

Government securities within the mandatory 
SLR requirement, to the extent allowed by RBI 
under MSF (presently to the extent of 2 per cent 
of NDTL)

**8.02%**

Marketable securities issued or guaranteed by 
foreign sovereigns having 0% risk-weight under 
Basel II Standardized Approach 

**1.18%**

Facility to avail Liquidity for Liquidity Coverage 
Ratio – FALLCR (presently to the extent of 16 per 
cent of NDTL)

**64.12%**

**Total Level 1 Assets
97.94%**

**Total Level 2A Assets
1.84%**

**Total Level 2B Assets
0.22%**

**Total Stock of HQLAs 
100.00%**

**Concentration of Funding Sources**

This metric includes those sources of funding, whose withdrawal could 
trigger liquidity risks. It aims to address the funding concentration 
of bank by monitoring its funding requirement from each significant 
counterparty and each significant product/ instrument. As per RBI 
guidelines, a “significant counterparty/Instrument/product” is defined 
as a single counterparty/Instrument/product or group of connected 
or affiliated counter-parties accounting in aggregate for more than 
1% of the bank’s total liabilities.

The bank has no significant counterparty (deposits/borrowings) as 
at 31.03.2024. Top 20 depositors of the bank constitute 3.87% of 
bank’s total Deposit as on March 31, 2024. The significant product/ 
instrument include Saving Fund, Current deposit and Core Term 
Deposit the funding from which are widely spread and cannot 
create concentration risk for the bank.

**Derivative exposure**

The bank has low exposure in derivatives having negligible impact 
on its liquidity position.

**Currency Mismatch**

As per RBI guidelines, a currency is considered as “significant” if 
the aggregate liabilities denominated in that currency amount to 5 
per cent or more of the bank’s total liabilities. In our case, only USD 
(9.48 % of bank’s total liabilities) falls in this criteria whose impact on 
total outflows in LCR horizon can be managed easily as the impact 
is not large considering the size of balance sheet of the bank.

**Degree of centralization of liquidity management and 
interaction between group’s units**

The group entities are managing liquidity on their own. However, 
the bank has put in place a group-wide contingency funding plan 
to take care of liquidity requirement of the group as a whole in the 
stress period.

**22.39%**

**8.02%**

**1.18%**

**64.12%**

----

 
 
dqy 
vfuèkkZfjr 
ewY; 
¼vkSlr½*

**dqy 
fuèkkZfjr 
ewY; 
¼vkSlr½**

**dqy 
vfuèkkZfjr 
ewY; 
¼vkSlr½**

**dqy 
fuèkkZfjr 
ewY; 
¼vkSlr½**

**dqy 
vfuèkkZfjr 
ewY; 
¼vkSlr½**

**dqy 
fuèkkZfjr 
ewY; 
¼vkSlr½**

**dqy 
vfuèkkZfjr 
ewY; 
¼vkSlr½**

**dqy 
fuèkkZfjr 
ewY; 
¼vkSlr½**

dqy 
vfuèkkZfjr 
ewY; 
¼vkSlr½*

**dqy 
fuèkkZfjr 
ewY; 
¼vkSlr½**

**mPp xq.koÙkkiw.kZ rjy vkfLr;ka**

**1
dqy mPp xq.koÙkkiw.kZ rjy 
vkfLr;ka ¼,pD;w,y,½**

**3,12,259.36
3,01,354.70
3,05,341.05
3,05,865.27
2,95,254.95**

**udnh dk cfgxZeu**

**2
NksVs O;olk; ds xzkgdksa ls 
[kqnjk tek vkSj tek] ftuesa 
ls%**

**9,04,026.17
85,482.28
8,88,978.92
84,043.42
8,73,808.43
82,608.44
8,56,679.56
80,907.69
8,40,710.12
79,289.81**

(i)
fLFkj tek
98,406.71
4,920.34
97,089.38
4,854.47
95,448.16
4,772.41
95,068.13
4,753.45
95,624.11
4,781.21

(ii)
de fLFkj tek
8,05,619.45
80,561.95
7,91,889.53
79,188.95
7,78,360.27
77,836.03
7,61,611.44
76,154.24
7,45,086.01
74,508.60

**3
vlqjf{kr Fkksd fufèk] ftuesa 
ls%**

**2,71,070.14
1,51,887.56
2,52,662.71
1,39,144.82
2,54,916.75
1,37,521.24
2,56,723.35
1,38,368.90
2,40,162.41
1,29,990.16**

(i)
ifjpkyu tek ¼lHkh çfri{k½
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

**(ii)
xSj&ifjpkyu tek  
¼lHkh çfri{k½**

2,71,070.14
1,51,887.56
2,52,662.71
1,39,144.82
2,54,916.75
1,37,521.24
2,56,723.35
1,38,368.90
2,40,162.41
1,29,990.16

(iii)
vlqjf{kr _.k
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

**4
lqjf{kr Fkksd foÙk iks"k.k
-
-
-
-
-**

**5
vfrfjä vko';drk,a] ftuesa 
ls**

**64,112.79
5,922.71
63,684.79
10,193.70
56,919.18
5,763.08
54,241.26
5,623.35
52,241.31
5,850.03**

558.13
558.13
4,757.83
4,757.83
365.77
365.77
413.76
256.19
221.62
221.62

**(ii)
_.k mRiknksa ij èku dh gkfu 
ls lacafèkr cfgokZg**

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

(iii)
_.k vkSj pyfufèk dh lqfoèkk,a
63,554.66
5,364.58
58,926.95
5,435.87
56,553.41
5,397.31
53,827.50
5,367.16
52,019.69
5,628.41

**6
vU; lafonkRed foÙkiks"k.k 
nkf;Ro**

**-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-**

**7
vU; vkdfLed foÙkiks"k.k 
nkf;Ro**

**1,32,117.80
5,768.02
1,52,830.96
9,628.21
1,53,095.11
8,286.81
1,51,033.59
9,319.01
1,43,739.79
8,085.79**

**8
dqy udnh dk cfgxZeu
2,49,060.56
2,43,010.15
2,34,179.57
2,34,218.95
2,23,215.79**

**udnh varokZg**

9
lqjf{kr _.k ¼tSls fjolZ jsiks½
5,461.28
-
1,899.58
-
2,822.98
-
10,987.80
-
3,146.27
0.00

**10
iwjh rjg ls çn'kZu dj 
tksf[ke ls varokZg**

30,110.61
23,354.22
27,480.42
22,030.43
32,059.18
24,024.33
39,229.82
32,972.79
40,858.69
33,053.53

11
vU; udnh varokZg
5,650.94
5,194.65
1,163.49
778.97
5,635.12
5,635.12
9,639.98
9,534.70
8,228.79
8,228.79

**12
dqy udnh varokZg
41,222.84
28,548.87
30,543.50
22,809.39
40,517.28
29,659.45
59,857.60
42,507.49
52,233.75
41,282.32**

13
dqy ,pD;w,y,
3,12,259.36
3,01,354.70
3,05,341.05
3,05,865.27
2,95,254.95

14
dqy fuoy udn cfgokZg
2,20,511.69
2,20,200.76
2,04,520.11
1,91,711.46
1,81,933.47

15
pyfufèk dojst vuqikr (%)
141.61
136.85
149.30
159.54
162.29

----

**QUANTITATIVE DISCLOSURE ON LIQUIDITY COVERAGE RATIO**

**(Amount in ₹ crore)**

**Quarter ended Mar’24
Quarter ended Dec’23
Quarter ended Sep’23
Quarter ended June’23
Quarter ended Mar’23**

 
 
Total 
Unweighted 
Value 
(average)*

Total 
Weighted 
Value 
(average)

Total 
Unweighted 
Value 
(average)

Total 
Weighted 
Value 
(average)

Total 
Unweighted 
Value 
(average)

Total 
Weighted 
Value 
(average)

Total 
Unweighted 
Value 
(average)

Total 
Weighted 
Value 
(average)

Total 
Unweighted 
Value 
(average)*

Total 
Weighted 
Value 
(average)

 
Based on the simple average of daily 
observations
63 Data Points
62 Data Points
65 data Points
61 Data Points
63 Data Points

**High Quality Liquid Assets**

**1
Total High Quality Liquid  Assets 
(HQLA)
3,12,259.36
3,01,354.70
3,05,341.05
3,05,865.27
2,95,254.95**

**Cash Outflows**

**2
Retail deposits and deposits 
from small business customers 
of which :**

**9,04,026.17
85,482.28
8,88,978.92
84,043.42
8,73,808.43
82,608.44
8,56,679.56
80,907.69
8,40,710.12
79,289.81**

(i)
Stable deposits
98,406.71
4,920.34
97,089.38
4,854.47
95,448.16
4,772.41
95,068.13
4,753.45
95,624.11
4,781.21

(ii)
Less stable deposits
8,05,619.45
80,561.95
7,91,889.53
79,188.95
7,78,360.27
77,836.03
7,61,611.44
76,154.24
7,45,086.01
74,508.60

**3
Unsecured wholesale funding, 
of which:
2,71,070.14
1,51,887.56
2,52,662.71
1,39,144.82
2,54,916.75
1,37,521.24
2,56,723.35
1,38,368.90
2,40,162.41
1,29,990.16**

(i)
Operational deposits (all 
counterparties)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

(ii)
Non-operational deposits (all 
counterparties)
2,71,070.14
1,51,887.56
2,52,662.71
1,39,144.82
2,54,916.75
1,37,521.24
2,56,723.35
1,38,368.90
2,40,162.41
1,29,990.16

(iii)
Unsecured debt
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

**4
Secured wholesale funding
-
-
-
-
-**

**5
Additional requirements, of which
64,112.79
5,922.71
63,684.79
10,193.70
56,919.18
5,763.08
54,241.26
5,623.35
52,241.31
5,850.03**

**(i)
Outflows related to derivative 
exposures and other collateral 
requirements**

558.13
558.13
4,757.83
4,757.83
365.77
365.77
413.76
256.19
221.62
221.62

(ii)
Outflows related to loss of 
funding on debt products
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

(iii)
Credit and liquidity facilities
63,554.66
5,364.58
58,926.95
5,435.87
56,553.41
5,397.31
53,827.50
5,367.16
52,019.69
5,628.41

**6
Other contractual funding 
obligations
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-**

**7
Other contingent funding 
obligations
1,32,117.80
5,768.02
1,52,830.96
9,628.21
1,53,095.11
8,286.81
1,51,033.59
9,319.01
1,43,739.79
8,085.79**

**8
Total Cash Outflows
2,49,060.56
2,43,010.15
2,34,179.57
2,34,218.95
2,23,215.79**

**Cash Inflows**

9
Secured lending (e.g. reverse 
repos)
5,461.28
-
1,899.58
-
2,822.98
-
10,987.80
-
3,146.27
0.00

10
Inflows from fully performing 
exposures
30,110.61
23,354.22
27,480.42
22,030.43
32,059.18
24,024.33
39,229.82
32,972.79
40,858.69
33,053.53

11
Other cash  inflows
5,650.94
5,194.65
1,163.49
778.97
5,635.12
5,635.12
9,639.98
9,534.70
8,228.79
8,228.79

**12
Total Cash  Inflows
41,222.84
28,548.87
30,543.50
22,809.39
40,517.28
29,659.45
59,857.60
42,507.49
52,233.75
41,282.32**

13
TOTAL  HQLA
3,12,259.36
3,01,354.70
3,05,341.05
3,05,865.27
2,95,254.95

14
Total Net Cash Outflows
2,20,511.69
2,20,200.76
2,04,520.11
1,91,711.46
1,81,933.47

15
Liquidity Coverage Ratio (%)
141.61
136.85
149.30
159.54
162.29

***Simple averages of Daily observations over previous quarter.**

----

**2.	
c) 	 Net Stable Funding ratio (NSFR)**

**QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURE ON NET STABLE FUNDING 
RATIO**

The Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) and Liquidity Coverage 
Ratio (LCR) are significant components of the Basel III reforms. 
The LCR guidelines which promote short term resilience of a 
bank’s liquidity profile have been issued vide circular DBOD.
BP.BC.No.120/21.04.098/2013-14 dated June 9, 2014. The NSFR 
guidelines on the other hand ensure reduction in funding risk over 
a longer time horizon by requiring banks to fund their activities with 
sufficiently stable sources of funding in order to mitigate the risk of 
future funding stress.

In the Indian context, the guidelines for NSFR were effective from 
October 1, 2021. The NSFR is defined as the amount of available 
stable funding relative to the amount of required stable funding. 
“Available stable funding” (ASF) is defined as the portion of 
capital and liabilities expected to be reliable over the time horizon 
considered by the NSFR, which extends to one year. The amount 
of stable funding required (“Required stable funding”) (RSF) of a 
specific institution is a function of the liquidity characteristics and 
residual maturities of the various assets held by that institution as 
well as those of its off-balance sheet (OBS) exposures. The run-
off factors for the stressed scenarios are prescribed by the RBI, 
for various categories of liabilities (viz., deposits, unsecured and 
secured wholesale borrowings), undrawn commitments, derivative-
related exposures, and offset with inflows emanating from assets 
maturing within the same time period. The minimum NSFR 
requirement set out in the RBI guideline for the standalone Bank 
and for Group effective October 1, 2021 is 100%.

PNB on a consolidated basis at 31st March, 2024 maintained 
Available Stable Funding (ASF) of ₹12,19,306 Crore against the 
RSF requirement of ₹8,53,748 Crore. The NSFR for the quarter 
ended March 31, 2024 was at 142.82%. 

The Available Stable Funding (ASF) is primarily driven by the total 
regulatory capital as per Basel III Capital Adequacy guidelines 
stipulated by RBI and deposits from retail customers, small 
business customers and non-financial corporate customers. 
Under the Required Stable Funding (RSF), the primary drivers are 
unencumbered performing loans with residual maturities of one 
year or more.

**2-	 lh½  fuoy fLFkj fufèk;u vuqikr ¼,u,l,Qvkj½**

**fuoy fLFkj fufèk;u vuqikr ij xq.kkRed çdVhdj.k**

----

ANNUAL
REPORT

343

**BLANK PAGE**

----

**fuoy fLFkj fufèk;u vuqikr ij ek=kRed çdVhdj.k**

**lesfdr
,u,l,Qvkj çdVhdj.k ;Fkkor
31.03.2024
31.12.2023**

**(₹ djksM+ esa)**

**< 6 ekg
6 ekg 
ls  
< 1 o"kZ**

**< 6 ekg
6 ekg ls  
< 1 o"kZ
≥ 1 o"kZ**

,,l,Q en
1
iwath% (2+3)
1,06,264
0
0
35,147
1,41,411
1,00,053
0
0
35,734
1,35,787

2
fofu;ked iwath
1,06,264
0
0
30,701
1,36,965
1,00,053
0
0
29,636
1,29,689

3
vU; iwath fy[kr
0
0
0
4,446
4,446
0
0
0
6,098
6,098

4
NksVs O;olk; ds xzkgdksa ls tek vkSj [kqnjk tek% (5+6)
4,58,694
1,38,733
3,88,178
697
8,93,279
4,62,657
1,45,494
3,65,773
822
8,82,739

5
fLFkj tek
73,119
11,697
25,930
271
1,05,480
73,393
12,818
21,498
242
1,02,565

6
de fLFkj tek
3,85,574
1,27,036
3,62,248
426
7,87,799
3,89,264
1,32,676
3,44,275
581
7,80,174

7
Fkksd foÙkiks"k.k% (8+9)
71,129
89,154
1,44,891
23,484
1,76,071
83,331
1,58,883
74,450
25,345
1,83,267

8
ifjpkyu tek
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

9
vU; Fkksd fuf/k;u
71,129
89,154
1,44,891
23,484
1,76,071
83,331
1,58,883
74,450
25,345
1,83,267

10
vU; ns;rk,a% (11+12)
44,768
80,825
3,800
8,545
8,545
11,555
77,404
4,651
9,413
10,455

11
,u,l,Qvkj O;qRiUu nsunkfj;ka
 
0
0
0
 
 
0
0
0
 

44,768
80,825
3,800
8,545
8,545
11,555
77,404
4,651
9,413
10,455

 
 
 
 
18,766
 
 
 
 
18,313

15
ifjpkyu mís';ksa ds fy, vU; foÙkh; laLFkkuksa esa 
tekjkf'k;ka

4,066
33
0
0
2,050
2,335
29
0
0
1,182

16
_.k vkSj çfrHkwfr;ksa dk fu"iknu% (17+18+19+21+23)
5,305
2,75,584
85,986
6,97,126
7,10,302
3,161
2,44,485
86,243
6,87,034
6,99,670

17
Lrj 1 ,pD;w,y, }kjk lqjf{kr foÙkh; laLFkkuksa dks 
_.k nsuk

0
23,824
0
0
2,382
0
866
120
0
272

0
81,054
18,580
86,942
1,08,391
0
85,857
22,996
96,256
1,20,633

0
1,37,425
62,044
4,49,966
4,52,458
0
1,27,417
59,900
4,43,383
4,44,639

20
_.k tksf[ke ds fy, csly II ekudh—r –f"Vdks.k 
ds rgr 35% ls de ;k mlds cjkcj ds tksf[ke Hkkj 
ds lkFk

0
75,063
42,312
1,48,736
1,55,366
0
68,103
36,755
1,32,486
1,38,536

21
dk;Z'khy vkoklh; caèkd] ftuesa ls%
0
29,867
2,177
82,392
73,111
0
25,943
1,878
67,911
60,528

22
_.k tksf[ke ds fy, csly II ekudh—r –f"Vdks.k 
ds rgr 35% ls de ;k mlds cjkcj ds tksf[ke Hkkj 
ds lkFk

0
23,566
1,847
64,723
54,776
0
21,241
1,628
55,537
47,534

5,305
3,414
3,184
77,825
73,960
3,161
4,402
1,349
79,484
73,598

25
lksus lfgr HkkSfrd O;kikj okyh oLrq,a
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

398
0
0
0
339
397
3
0
0
340

27
,u,l,Qvkj O;qRiUu vkfLr;ka
0
0
0
0
-
0
11
0
0
11

22
0
0
0
22
28
0
0
0
28

30
rqyu&i=ksÙkj en
0
759
66,606
65,364
5,328
0
967
67,328
61,043
5,244

31
dqy vkj,l,Q
 
 
 
 
8,53,748
 
 
 
 
8,55,754

32
fuoy fLFkj fufèk;u vuqikr (%)
 
 
 
 
142.82
 
 
 
 
141.66

----

**QUANTITATIVE DISCLOSURE ON NET STABLE FUNDING RATIO**

**Consolidated**

**NSFR Disclosure as on
31.03.2024
31.12.2023**

**(₹ in Crore)**

Unweighted value by residual maturity
Weighted 
value
Unweighted value by residual maturity
Weighted 
value
No 
maturity
< 6 
months
6 
months 
to < 1yr

**≥ 1yr
No 
maturity
< 6 
months
6 
months 
to < 1yr**

**≥ 1yr**

**ASF Item**

1
Capital: (2+3)
1,06,264
0
0
35,147
1,41,411
1,00,053
0
0
35,734
1,35,787

2
Regulatory capital
1,06,264
0
0
30,701
1,36,965
1,00,053
0
0
29,636
1,29,689

3
Other capital instruments
0
0
0
4,446
4,446
0
0
0
6,098
6,098

4
Retail deposits and deposits from small business 
customers: (5+6)
4,58,694
1,38,733
3,88,178
697
8,93,279
4,62,657
1,45,494
3,65,773
822
8,82,739

5
Stable deposits
73,119
11,697
25,930
271
1,05,480
73,393
12,818
21,498
242
1,02,565

6
Less stable deposits
3,85,574
1,27,036
3,62,248
426
7,87,799
3,89,264
1,32,676
3,44,275
581
7,80,174

7
Wholesale funding: (8+9)
71,129
89,154
1,44,891
23,484
1,76,071
83,331
1,58,883
74,450
25,345
1,83,267

8
Operational deposits
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

9
Other wholesale funding
71,129
89,154
1,44,891
23,484
1,76,071
83,331
1,58,883
74,450
25,345
1,83,267

10
Other liabilities: (11+12)
44,768
80,825
3,800
8,545
8,545
11,555
77,404
4,651
9,413
10,455

11
NSFR derivative liabilities
 
0
0
0
 
 
0
0
0
 

12
All other liabilities and equity not included in the 
above categories
44,768
80,825
3,800
8,545
8,545
11,555
77,404
4,651
9,413
10,455

13
Total ASF (1+4+7+10)
 
 
 
 
12,19,306
 
 
 
 
12,12,247

**RSF Item**

14
Total NSFR high-quality liquid assets (HQLA)
 
 
 
 
18,766
 
 
 
 
18,313

15
Deposits held at other financial institutions for 
operational purposes
4,066
33
0
0
2,050
2,335
29
0
0
1,182

16
Performing loans and securities: (17+18+19+21+23)
5,305
2,75,584
85,986
6,97,126
7,10,302
3,161
2,44,485
86,243
6,87,034
6,99,670

17
Performing loans to financial institutions secured by 
Level 1 HQLA
0
23,824
0
0
2,382
0
866
120
0
272

18
Performing loans to financial institutions secured by 
non-Level 1 HQLA and unsecured performing loans 
to financial institutions

0
81,054
18,580
86,942
1,08,391
0
85,857
22,996
96,256
1,20,633

19
Performing loans to non- financial corporate clients, 
loans to retail and small business customers, and 
loans to sovereigns, central banks, and PSEs, of 
which:

0
1,37,425
62,044
4,49,966
4,52,458
0
1,27,417
59,900
4,43,383
4,44,639

20
With a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under 
the Basel II Standardised Approach for credit risk
0
75,063
42,312
1,48,736
1,55,366
0
68,103
36,755
1,32,486
1,38,536

21
Performing residential mortgages, of which:
0
29,867
2,177
82,392
73,111
0
25,943
1,878
67,911
60,528

22
With a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under 
the Basel II Standardised Approach for credit risk
0
23,566
1,847
64,723
54,776
0
21,241
1,628
55,537
47,534

23
Securities that are not in default and do not qualify 
as HQLA, including exchange- traded equities
5,305
3,414
3,184
77,825
73,960
3,161
4,402
1,349
79,484
73,598

24
Other assets: (sum of rows 25 to 29)
1,00,468
1,572
949
14,373
1,17,302
1,08,258
1,729
915
20,502
1,31,345

25
Physical traded commodities, including gold
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

26
Assets posted as initial margin for derivative 
contracts and contributions to default funds of CCPs
398
0
0
0
339
397
3
0
0
340

27
NSFR derivative assets
0
0
0
0
-
0
11
0
0
11

28
NSFR derivative liabilities before deduction of 
variation margin posted
22
0
0
0
22
28
0
0
0
28

29
All other assets not included in the above categories
1,00,048
1,572
949
14,373
1,16,941
1,07,833
1,716
915
20,502
1,30,967

30
Off-balance sheet items
0
759
66,606
65,364
5,328
0
967
67,328
61,043
5,244

31
Total RSF
 
 
 
 
8,53,748
 
 
 
 
8,55,754

32
Net Stable Funding Ratio (%)
 
 
 
 
142.82
 
 
 
 
141.66

----

**fuoy fLFkj fufèk;u vuqikr ij ek=kRed çdVhdj.k**

**lesfdr
,u,l,Qvkj çdVhdj.k ;Fkkor
31.03.2024
31.12.2023**

**(₹ djksM+ esa)**

**< 6 ekg
6 ekg 
ls  
< 1 o"kZ**

**< 6 ekg
6 ekg ls  
< 1 o"kZ
≥ 1 o"kZ**

,,l,Q en
1
iwath% (2+3)
1,11,757
0
0
36,580
1,48,337
1,11,657
0
2,000
31,308
1,42,965

2
fofu;ked iwath
1,11,757
0
0
29,083
1,40,840
1,11,657
0
0
26,228
1,37,885

3
vU; iwath fy[kr
0
0
0
7,497
7,497
0
0
2,000
5,080
5,080

4
NksVs O;olk; ds xzkgdksa ls tek vkSj [kqnjk tek% (5+6)
4,50,339
28,915
62,612
4,29,887
9,20,522
4,46,919
31,101
1,06,444
3,80,126
9,08,618

5
fLFkj tek
48860
3,978
6282
41,612
97,776
48,346
4,191
10,428
37,595
97,392

6
de fLFkj tek
4,01,479
24,936
56,330
3,88,275
8,22,745
3,98,573
26,910
96,016
3,42,531
8,11,226

7
Fkksd foÙkiks"k.k% (8+9)
79,783
77,785
40,981
97,311
1,96,274
89,420
1,09,581
66,161
96,652
2,29,234

8
ifjpkyu tek
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

9
vU; Fkksd fuf/k;u
79,783
77,785
40981
97,311
1,96,274
89,420
1,09,581
66,161
96,652
2,29,234

10
vU; ns;rk,a% (11+12)
18,437
86,764
2038
8,469
8,484
7,363
29,002
56
7,080
7,090

11
,u,l,Qvkj O;qRiUu nsunkfj;ka
 
0
0
0
 
 
0
0
5
 

18,437
86,764
2,038
8,469
8,484
7,363
29,002
56
7,075
7,090

18,274
18,240

15
ifjpkyu mís';ksa ds fy, vU; foÙkh; laLFkkuksa esa 
tekjkf'k;ka

6,338
57
0
0
3,198
14,441
44
0
0
7,243

16
_.k vkSj çfrHkwfr;ksa dk fu"iknu% (17+18+19+21+23)
19,581
69,049
54,181
8,55,251
7,62,598
9,370
65,507
55,227
7,32,555
7,29,295

17
Lrj 1 ,pD;w,y, }kjk lqjf{kr foÙkh; laLFkkuksa dks 
_.k nsuk

0
1,018
114
0
285
0
764
310
0
231

0
31,095
16,529
1,57,784
1,70,713
0
32,746
11,406
1,40,904
1,51,519

0
30,150
29,244
5,19,975
4,30,583
0
24,776
33,849
4,10,472
4,29,145

20
_.k tksf[ke ds fy, csly II ekudh—r –f"Vdks.k 
ds rgr 35% ls de ;k mlds cjkcj ds tksf[ke Hkkj 
ds lkFk

0
11,212
10,747
2,08,858
1,46,739
0
10,723
14,567
2,34,622
1,65,148

21
dk;Z'khy vkoklh; caèkd] ftuesa ls%
0
5,537
5,092
96,672
70,312
0
3,519
5,375
90,604
66,002

22
_.k tksf[ke ds fy, csly II ekudh—r –f"Vdks.k 
ds rgr 35% ls de ;k mlds cjkcj ds tksf[ke Hkkj 
ds lkFk

0
4,790
4,507
85,872
60,465
0
3,051
4,660
78,759
55,343

19,581
1,249
3,201
80,820
90,706
9,370
3,702
4,288
90,574
82,398

25
lksus lfgr HkkSfrd O;kikj okyh oLrq,a
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

412
0
0
0
351
347
0
0
0
295

27
,u,l,Qvkj O;qRiUu vkfLr;ka
8
23
0
0
31
23
0
0
0
23

0
38
0
0
38
41
0
0
0
41

30
rqyu&i=ksÙkj en
0
1,060
1,12,760
60,876
7,514
0
1,078
55,691
65,170
4,794

**31
dqy vkj,l,Q
9,12,187
8,79,493**

**32
fuoy fLFkj fufèk;u vuqikr (%)
139.62
146.44**

----

**QUANTITATIVE DISCLOSURE ON NET STABLE FUNDING RATIO**

**Consolidated**

**NSFR Disclosure as on
30.09.2023
30.06.2023**

**(₹ in Crore)**

Unweighted value by residual maturity
Weighted 
value
Unweighted value by residual maturity

**No 
maturity
< 6 
months
6 
months 
to < 1yr**

**≥ 1yr
No 
maturity
< 6 
months
6 
months 
to < 1yr**

≥ 1yr
Weighted 
value

**ASF Item**

1
Capital: (2+3)
1,11,757
0
0
36,580
1,48,337
1,11,657
0
2,000
31,308
1,42,965

2
Regulatory capital
1,11,757
0
0
29,083
1,40,840
1,11,657
0
0
26,228
1,37,885

3
Other capital instruments
0
0
0
7,497
7,497
0
0
2,000
5,080
5,080

4
Retail deposits and deposits from small business 
customers: (5+6)
4,50,339
28,915
62,612
4,29,887
9,20,522
4,46,919
31,101
1,06,444
3,80,126
9,08,618

5
Stable deposits
48860
3,978
6282
41,612
97,776
48,346
4,191
10,428
37,595
97,392

6
Less stable deposits
4,01,479
24,936
56,330
3,88,275
8,22,745
3,98,573
26,910
96,016
3,42,531
8,11,226

7
Wholesale funding: (8+9)
79,783
77,785
40,981
97,311
1,96,274
89,420
1,09,581
66,161
96,652
2,29,234

8
Operational deposits
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

9
Other wholesale funding
79,783
77,785
40981
97,311
1,96,274
89,420
1,09,581
66,161
96,652
2,29,234

10
Other liabilities: (11+12)
18,437
86,764
2038
8,469
8,484
7,363
29,002
56
7,080
7,090

11
NSFR derivative liabilities
0
0
0
0
0
5
 

12
All other liabilities and equity not included in the 
above categories
18,437
86,764
2,038
8,469
8,484
7,363
29,002
56
7,075
7,090

**13
Total ASF (1+4+7+10)
12,73,617
12,87,906**

**RSF Item**

14
Total NSFR high-quality liquid assets (HQLA)
18,274
18,240

15
Deposits held at other financial institutions for 
operational purposes
6,338
57
0
0
3,198
14,441
44
0
0
7,243

16
Performing loans and securities: (17+18+19+21+23)
19,581
69,049
54,181
8,55,251
7,62,598
9,370
65,507
55,227
7,32,555
7,29,295

17
Performing loans to financial institutions secured by 
Level 1 HQLA
0
1,018
114
0
285
0
764
310
0
231

18
Performing loans to financial institutions secured by 
non-Level 1 HQLA and unsecured performing loans 
to financial institutions

0
31,095
16,529
1,57,784
1,70,713
0
32,746
11,406
1,40,904
1,51,519

19
Performing loans to non- financial corporate clients, 
loans to retail and small business customers, and 
loans to sovereigns, central banks, and PSEs, of 
which:

0
30,150
29,244
5,19,975
4,30,583
0
24,776
33,849
4,10,472
4,29,145

20
With a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under 
the Basel II Standardised Approach for credit risk
0
11,212
10,747
2,08,858
1,46,739
0
10,723
14,567
2,34,622
1,65,148

21
Performing residential mortgages, of which:
0
5,537
5,092
96,672
70,312
0
3,519
5,375
90,604
66,002

22
With a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under 
the Basel II Standardised Approach for credit risk
0
4,790
4,507
85,872
60,465
0
3,051
4,660
78,759
55,343

23
Securities that are not in default and do not qualify 
as HQLA, including exchange- traded equities
19,581
1,249
3,201
80,820
90,706
9,370
3,702
4,288
90,574
82,398

24
Other assets: (sum of rows 25 to 29)
88,603
1,083
49
31,103
1,20,604
98,096
697
27
21,283
1,19,921

25
Physical traded commodities, including gold
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

26
Assets posted as initial margin for derivative 
contracts and contributions to default funds of CCPs
412
0
0
0
351
347
0
0
0
295

27
NSFR derivative assets
8
23
0
0
31
23
0
0
0
23

28
NSFR derivative liabilities before deduction of 
variation margin posted
0
38
0
0
38
41
0
0
0
41

29
All other assets not included in the above categories
88,183
1,023
49
31,103
1,201,85
97,686
697
27
21,283
1,19,562

30
Off-balance sheet items
0
1,060
1,12,760
60,876
7,514
0
1,078
55,691
65,170
4,794

**31
Total RSF
9,12,187
8,79,493**

**32
Net Stable Funding Ratio (%)
139.62
146.44**

----

**3	 fuos'k**

**3-	 ,½ fuos'k iksVZQksfy;ks dh lajpuk**

**31-03-2024 rd ¼pkyw foÙkh; o"kZ½ **

¼jkf'k ₹ djksM+ esa½

**Hkkjr esa fuos'k
Hkkjr ds ckgj fuos'k**

**dqy 
fuos'k**

**ljdkjh izfrHkwfr;k¡**

**vU; LohÑfr izfrHkwfr;k¡**

**'ks;j**

**fMcsapj vkSj ckaM**

**leuq"kaxh vkSj@;k la;qä m|e**

**vU;**

**Hkkjr esa dqy fuos'k**

**ljdkjh izfrHkwfr;k¡ ¼LFkkuh; 
izkf/kdj.kksa lfgr½**

**leuq"kaxh vkSj@;k la;qä m|e**

**vU;**

**Hkkjr ls ckgj fuos'k**

ifjiDork ds fy, èkkfjr
ldy
318422.64
0.15
5.13
4200.65
2882.64
149.32
325660.53
0.00
2560.28
0.20
2560.49
328221.02

**?kVk,a% vutZd fuos'k 
¼,uihvkÃ½ ds fy, 
çkoèkku**

0.00
0.00
0.99
0.00
498.45
0.00
499.44
0.00
341.59
0.00
341.59
841.03

**fuoy
318422.64
0.15
4.14
4200.65
2384.19
149.32
325161.09
0.00
2218.70
0.20
2218.90
327379.99**

fcØh ds fy, miyCèk
ldy
51868.50
0.00
5174.07
32576.05
100.00
4456.94
94175.57
4154.31
0.00
668.12
4822.43
98998.00

0.00
0.00
2336.91
4574.29
1.03
854.08
7766.31
44.37
0.00
31.63
76.01
7842.31

**fuoy
51868.50
0.00
2837.16
28001.76
98.97
3602.87
86409.26
4109.94
0.00
636.49
4746.42
91155.69**

VªsÇMx ds fy, èkkfjr
ldy
1782.53
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1782.53
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1782.53

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

**fuoy
1782.53
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1782.53
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1782.53**

**dqy fuos'k
372073.67
0.15
5179.21
36776.69
2982.64
4606.27
421618.63
4154.31
2560.28
668.32
7382.92
429001.55**

?kVk,a% vutZd fuos'k 
¼,uihvkÃ½ ds fy, 
çkoèkku#

0.00
0.00
0.99
0.00
498.45
0.00
499.44
0.00
341.59
0.00
341.59
841.03

0.00
0.00
2336.91
4574.29
1.03
854.08
7766.31
44.37
0.00
31.63
76.01
7842.31

**fuoy
372073.67
0.15
2841.30
32202.41
2483.16
3752.19
413352.88
4109.94
2218.70
636.69
6965.32
420318.21**

----

**3.	 Investments**

**3.	
a)	
Composition of Investment Portfolio**

**As at 31.03.2024 (Current FY)**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

Investments in India
Investments outside India

Total 
Investments

Government Securities

Other Approved Securities

Shares

Debentures and Bonds

Subsidiaries and/or joint 
ventures

Others

Total investments in India

Government securities 
(including local
authorities

Subsidiaries and/or joint 
ventures

Others

Total Investments outside
India

**Held to Maturity**

Gross
318422.64
0.15
5.13
4200.65
2882.64
149.32
325660.53
0.00
2560.28
0.20
2560.49
328221.02

Less: Provision for 
non-performing 
investments (NPI)

0.00
0.00
0.99
0.00
498.45
0.00
499.44
0.00
341.59
0.00
341.59
841.03

**Net
318422.64
0.15
4.14
4200.65
2384.19
149.32
325161.09
0.00
2218.70
0.20
2218.90
327379.99**

**Available for Sale**

Gross
51868.50
0.00
5174.07
32576.05
100.00
4456.94
94175.57
4154.31
0.00
668.12
4822.43
98998.00

Less: Provision for 
depreciation and 
NPI

0.00
0.00
2336.91
4574.29
1.03
854.08
7766.31
44.37
0.00
31.63
76.01
7842.31

**Net
51868.50
0.00
2837.16
28001.76
98.97
3602.87
86409.26
4109.94
0.00
636.49
4746.42
91155.69**

**Held for Trading**

Gross
1782.53
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1782.53
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1782.53

Less: Provision for 
depreciation and 
NPI

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

**Net
1782.53
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1782.53
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1782.53**

**Total Investments
372073.67
0.15
5179.21
36776.69
2982.64
4606.27
421618.63
4154.31
2560.28
668.32
7382.92
429001.55**

Less: Provision for 
non-Performing 
investments (NPI)#

0.00
0.00
0.99
0.00
498.45
0.00
499.44
0.00
341.59
0.00
341.59
841.03

Less: Provision for 
depreciation and 
NPI

0.00
0.00
2336.91
4574.29
1.03
854.08
7766.31
44.37
0.00
31.63
76.01
7842.31

**Net
372073.67
0.15
2841.30
32202.41
2483.16
3752.19
413352.88
4109.94
2218.70
636.69
6965.32
420318.21**

# HTM only

Note: The Government Securities, face value of Rs. 1,14,585.01 Crore (Previous Year Rs. 60,362.65 Crore) have been kept as margin with RBI/CCIL/NSCCL/ICCL/MCX/
SHCIL towards Repo, TREPS borrowing & Securities Settlement as on March 31, 2024. Against which Rs. 110.11 crore has been utilized to meet margin requirements 
with CCIL

----

**31-03-2023 rd ¼xr foÙkh; o"kZ½ **

¼jkf'k ₹ djksM+ esa½

**Hkkjr esa fuos'k
Hkkjr ds ckgj fuos'k**

**dqy 
fuos'k**

**ljdkjh izfrHkwfr;k¡**

**vU; LohÑfr izfrHkwfr;k¡**

**'ks;j**

**fMcsapj vkSj ckaM**

**leuq"kaxh vkSj@;k la;qä m|e**

**vU;**

**Hkkjr esa dqy fuos'k**

**ljdkjh izfrHkwfr;k¡ ¼LFkkuh; 
izkf/kdj.kksa lfgr½**

**leuq"kaxh vkSj@;k la;qä m|e**

**vU;**

**Hkkjr ls ckgj fuos'k**

ifjiDork ds fy, èkkfjr
ldy
308287.81
0.15
5.13
4516.53
2188.11
223.42
315221.14
0.00
2487.46
0.20
2487.66
317708.80

**?kVk,a% vutZd fuos'k 
¼,uihvkÃ½ ds fy, 
çkoèkku**

0.00
0.00
1.01
0.00
394.39
0.00
395.40
0.00
341.59
0.00
341.59
736.99

**fuoy
308287.81
0.15
4.12
4516.53
1793.71
223.42
314825.73
0.00
2145.87
0.20
2146.07
316971.80**

fcØh ds fy, miyCèk
ldy
44479.70
0.00
5674.10
30185.27
100.00
2660.63
83099.70
3895.22
0.00
597.06
4492.28
87591.98

481.86
0.00
2616.63
4079.53
2.45
1431.67
8612.13
44.96
0.00
39.57
84.52
8696.65

**fuoy
43997.84
0.00
3057.47
26105.74
97.55
1228.97
74487.57
3850.27
0.00
557.49
4407.76
78895.33**

VªsÇMx ds fy, èkkfjr
ldy
129.79
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
129.79
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
129.79

0.20
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.20
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.20

**fuoy
129.58
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
129.58
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
129.58**

**dqy fuos'k
352897.29
0.15
5679.23
34701.80
2288.11
2884.05
398450.62
3895.22
2487.46
597.26
6979.94
405430.56**

?kVk,a% vutZd fuos'k 
¼,uihvkÃ½ ds fy, 
çkoèkku#

0.00
0.00
1.01
0.00
394.39
0.00
395.40
0.00
341.59
0.00
341.59
736.99

482.06
0.00
2616.63
4079.53
2.45
1431.67
8612.33
44.96
0.00
39.57
84.52
8696.85

**fuoy
352415.23
0.15
3061.59
30622.27
1891.27
1452.38
389442.89
3850.27
2145.87
557.69
6553.83
395996.72**

# dsoy ,pVh,e 

----

**As at 31.03.2023 (Previous FY)**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

Investments in India
Investments outside India

Government Securities

Other Approved Securities

Shares

Debentures and Bonds

Subsidiaries and/or joint 
ventures

Others

Total investments in India

Government securities 
(including local
authorities

Subsidiaries and/or joint 
ventures

Others

Total Investments outside
India

Total Investments

**Held to Maturity**

Gross
308287.81
0.15
5.13
4516.53
2188.11
223.42
315221.14
0.00
2487.46
0.20
2487.66
317708.80

Less: Provision for 
non-performing 
investments (NPI)

0.00
0.00
1.01
0.00
394.39
0.00
395.40
0.00
341.59
0.00
341.59
736.99

**Net
308287.81
0.15
4.12
4516.53
1793.71
223.42
314825.73
0.00
2145.87
0.20
2146.07
316971.80**

**Available for Sale**

Gross
44479.70
0.00
5674.10
30185.27
100.00
2660.63
83099.70
3895.22
0.00
597.06
4492.28
87591.98

Less: Provision for 
depreciation and NPI
481.86
0.00
2616.63
4079.53
2.45
1431.67
8612.13
44.96
0.00
39.57
84.52
8696.65

**Net
43997.84
0.00
3057.47
26105.74
97.55
1228.97
74487.57
3850.27
0.00
557.49
4407.76
78895.33**

**Held for Trading**

Gross
129.79
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
129.79
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
129.79

Less: Provision for 
depreciation and NPI
0.20
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.20
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.20

**Net
129.58
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
129.58
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
129.58**

**Total Investments
352897.29
0.15
5679.23
34701.80
2288.11
2884.05
398450.62
3895.22
2487.46
597.26
6979.94
405430.56**

Less: Provision for 
non-
Performing 
investments (NPI)#

0.00
0.00
1.01
0.00
394.39
0.00
395.40
0.00
341.59
0.00
341.59
736.99

Less: Provision for 
depreciation and NPI
482.06
0.00
2616.63
4079.53
2.45
1431.67
8612.33
44.96
0.00
39.57
84.52
8696.85

**Net
352415.23
0.15
3061.59
30622.27
1891.27
1452.38
389442.89
3850.27
2145.87
557.69
6553.83
395996.72**

# HTM only

----

**3.	
b)	 Movement of Provisions for Depreciation and**

**Investment Fluctuation Reserve**

(Amount in ₹ crore)

Particulars
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year

i) 
Movement of provisions held towards depreciation on investments

a)
Opening balance
9433.85
7225.30

b)
Add: Provision made during the year
28.39
2467.60

c)
Add: Proportionate Provision transferred to 
NPI Provision on account of restructuring
1772.06
1012.26

d)
Less: Write off / write back of excess 
provisions during the Year
1748.70
65.13

e)
Less: Provisions against securities sold/
restructured/ write-off
802.25
1206.18

f)
Closing balance
8683.35
9433.84

ii) 
Movement of Investment Fluctuation Reserve

a)
Opening balance
1588.40
1393.66

b)
Add: Transfer from P&L Appropriation A/c
288.95
194.74

c)
Less: Drawdown
0.00
0.00

d)
Closing balance
1877.35
1588.40

iii) 
Closing balance in IFR as a percentage of 
closing balance of investments in AFS and 
HFT/Current category (Net)

2.02%
2.01%

**3.	
c)	
Sale and transfers to/from HTM category:**

The total value of sales and transfers of securities to / from HTM 
category after netting permitted exclusions in terms of RBI Master 
Circular No. DOR.MRG.42/21.04.141/ 2021-22 dated 25.08.2021 
during 1st April 2023 to 31st March 2024 has not exceeded 5% 
of the book value of investments held in HTM category as on 
31.03.2023.

As such no disclosure is to be made in terms of extant RBI 
guidelines.

(Previous year: The total value of sales and transfers of securities 
to / from HTM category after netting permitted exclusions in terms 
of RBI Master Circular No. DOR.MRG.42/21.04.141/2021-22 
dated 25.08.2021 during 1st April 2022 to 31st March 2023 has 
not exceeded 5% of the book value of investments held in HTM 
category as on 31.03.2022.

As such no disclosure is to be made in terms of extant RBI 
guidelines.)

**3. 	 d) 	 Non-SLR investment portfolio**

3. 	 d)	
i)   Non-performing non-SLR investments	

(Amount in ₹ crore)

Sr. No.
Particulars
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year
a)
Opening balance
7002.58
7027.26
b)
Additions during the year 
1456.86
1818.17
c)
Reductions 
during 
the 
above period
1799.05
1842.85

d)
Closing balance
6660.39
7002.58
e)
Total provisions held
6660.39
7001.51

**fooj.k
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

1772.06
1012.26

1748.70
65.13

802.25
1206.18

,Q½
vafre 'ks"k
8683.35
9433.84

288.95
194.74

lh½
?kVk,a% fxjkoV
0.00
0.00
Mh½
vafre 'ks"k
1877.35
1588.40

2.02%
2.01%

ch½
o"kZ ds nkSjku ifjoèkZu
1456.86
1818.17

lh½
mijksä vofèk ds nkSjku deh
1799.05
1842.85

Mh½
vafre 'ks"k
6660.39
7002.58

Ã½
dqy èkkfjr çkoèkku
6660.39
7001.51

----

**3. 	 d)	 ii)  Issuer composition of non-SLR investments**

 (Amount in ₹ crore)

**Sr. 
No.
Issuer
Amount
Extent of Private 
Placement
Extent of ‘Below Investment 
Grade’ Securities
Extent of ‘Unrated’ 
Securities
Extent of ‘Unlisted’ 
Securities**

**(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)**

**Current 
Year
Previous 
Year
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year
Current  
Year
Previous 
Year
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year**

a)
PSUs
14,079.89 
15,419.93 
13,063.09 
9,573.05 
 1,082.14 
1,249.07 
- 
             - 
1,782.98 
2,289.17 

b)
FIs
6,777.09 
6,972.83 
 6,432.53 
4,794.66 
              44.00 
44.00 
        - 
             - 
     - 
- 

c)
Banks
6,703.22 
5,340.74 
5,682.59 
2,234.06 
                     - 
51.12 
- 
             - 
- 
- 

d)
Private 
Corporates
11,311.40 
8,897.09 
7,934.97 
7,857.26 
5,619.02 
4,972.21 
- 
             - 
- 
- 

e)
Subsidiaries/ 
Joint Ventures
3,960.13 
3,388.55 
3,960.13 
 3,388.55 
- 
- 
- 
             - 
- 
- 

f)
Others*
70,109.14 
68,703.35 
9,554.46 
5,907.33 
920.29 
93.36 
             - 
             - 
             - 
             - 

g)
Less: Provision 
held towards 
depreciation

8,683.34
8,952.22
8,266.13
8,312.88
5,355.76
4,694.29
- 
             - 
- 
- 

**Total **
104257.53
99770.27
38361.64
25442.03
2309.69
1715.47
0.00
0.00
1782.98
2289.17**

*Others include special Govt. Securities of ₹ 56,013.14 Crore (previous year ₹56189.38 Crore) [Net of depreciation, if any] and includes US Treasury and China 
govt. bonds/local govt. bond.

**Amounts reported under columns 4, 5, 6 and 7 above may not be mutually exclusive.

**(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)**

a)
ih,l;w
14,079.89 
15,419.93 
13,063.09 
9,573.05 
 1,082.14 
1,249.07 
- 
             - 
1,782.98 
2,289.17 

b)
,QvkbZ
6,777.09 
6,972.83 
 6,432.53 
4,794.66 
              44.00 
44.00 
        - 
             - 
     - 
- 

c)
cSad
6,703.22 
5,340.74 
5,682.59 
2,234.06 
                     - 
51.12 
- 
             - 
- 
- 

d)
futh dkWiksjsV
11,311.40 
8,897.09 
7,934.97 
7,857.26 
5,619.02 
4,972.21 
- 
             - 
- 
- 

e)
vuq"kafx;k¡@
la;qä m|e

3,960.13 
3,388.55 
3,960.13 
 3,388.55 
- 
- 
- 
             - 
- 
- 

f)
vU; *
70,109.14 
68,703.35 
9,554.46 
5,907.33 
920.29 
93.36 
             - 
             - 
             - 
             - 

g)
?kVk,a% ewY;ºzkl 
ds fy, çkoèkku

8,683.34
8,952.22
8,266.13
8,312.88
5,355.76
4,694.29
- 
             - 
- 
- 

**tksM+ **
104257.53
99770.27
38361.64
25442.03
2309.69
1715.47
0.00
0.00
1782.98
2289.17**

----

31.03.2024 dks 
cdk;k

i)
jsiks ds vUrxZr csph xbZ izfrHkwfr;k¡ 

,)	 ljdkjh izfrHkwfr;k¡
3.93
4299.94
742.69
0.00

(15.18)
(2022.08)
(254.20)
(0.00)

ch)	 dkWiksjsV _.k izfrHkwfr;k¡
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)

lh)	 dksbZ vU; izfrHkwfr;k¡
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)

ii)
fjolZ jsiks ds vUrxZr [kjhnh xÃ çfrHkwfr;ka

,)	 ljdkjh izfrHkwfr;k¡
5.13
14064.35
685.46
34.84

(10.08)
(11817.61)
(285.58)
(11817.61)

ch)	 dkWiksjsV _.k izfrHkwfr;k¡
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)

lh)	 dksbZ vU; izfrHkwfr;k¡
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)

pkyw o"kZ 
ds nkSjku 
U;wure 
cdk;k

xr o"kZ 
ds nkSjku 
U;wure 
cdk;k

pkyw o"kZ 
ds nkSjku 
vf/kdre 
cdk;k

xr o"kZ 
ds nkSjku 
vf/kdre 
cdk;k

pkyw o"kZ 
ds nkSjku 
nSfud 
vkSlr 
cdk;k

xr o"kZ 
ds nkSjku 
nSfud 
vkSlr 
cdk;k

pkyw o"kZ 
ds nkSjku 
ysu&nsu 
dh dqy 
ek=k

xr o"kZ 
ds nkSjku 
ysu&nsu 
dh dqy 
ek=k

pkyw foÙkh; 
o"kZ ds  
31 ekpZ rd 
cdk;k

xr foÙkh; 
o"kZ ds  
31 ekpZ 
rd cdk;k

th,l,y ysunsu 
ds ekè;e ls mèkkj 
nh xÃ çfrHkwfr;k¡

th,l,y ysunsu 
ds rgr laikÆ'od 
ds :i esa çkIr 
çfrHkwfr;k¡

----

**3.	
e)	
Repo transactions (in face value terms)**

 (Amount in ₹ crore)

**Minimum outstanding 
during the Year
Maximum outstanding 
during the Year
Daily average 
outstanding 
during the year**

**Outstanding as 
on 31.03.2024**

i)
Securities sold under repo

a)	
Government securities
3.93
4299.94
742.69
0.00

(15.18)
(2022.08)
(254.20)
(0.00)

b)	
Corporate debt securities
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)

c)	
Any other securities
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)

ii)
Securities purchased under reverse repo

a)	
Government securities
5.13
14064.35
685.46
34.84

(10.08)
(11817.61)
(285.58)
(11817.61)

b)	
Corporate debt securities
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)

c)	
Any other securities
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)

**3.	
f) 	 Disclosure related to Government Securities Lending**

Minimum 
outstanding 
during the 
current 
year

Minimum 
outstanding 
during the 
previous 
year

Maximum 
outstanding 
during the 
current 
year

Maximum 
outstanding 
during the 
previous 
year

Daily 
Average 
outstanding 
during the 
current 
year

Daily 
Average 
outstanding 
during the 
previous 
year

Total 
volume of 
transaction 
during the 
current 
year

Total 
volume of 
transaction 
during the 
previous 
year

Outstanding 
as on March 
31 of the 
current 
financial 
year

Outstanding 
as on 
March 31 of 
the previous 
financial 
year

Securities lent 
through GSL 
transactions

Securities borrowed 
through GSL 
transactions

NIL

Securities placed 
as collateral under 
GSL transactions

Securities received 
as collateral under 
GSL transactions

----

**4-	 vkfLr xq.kork**

**ekud
vutZd
dqy
dqy ekud 
vfxze
voekud
lafnX/k
gkfu
dqy vutZd 
vfxze**

**ldy ekud vfxze vkSj ,u,ih,**

çkjfEHkd 'ks"k
807353.02
(692656.32)
12226.61
(16401.47)
43413.63
(59009.18)
21687.43
(17037.39)
77327.67
(92448.04)
884680.69
(785104.36)

tksM+sa% o"kZ ds nkSjku ifjoèkZu
5826.20
(16028.92)

?kVk,a% o"kZ ds nkSjku dVkSrh*
26810.81
(31149.29)

**vafre 'ks"k
926981.65
(807353.02)
4875.91
(12226.61)
39550.75
(43413.63)
11916.39
(21687.43)
56343.05
(77327.67)
983324.70
(884680.69)**

*fuEu ds dkj.k ldy ,uih, esa deh%

i)	 mUu;u
3447.81
(4770.30)
3447.81
(4770.30)

ii)	 olwyh ¼mUu;u [kkrksa ls olwyh dks 
NksM+dj½

7105.78
(9800.99)
7105.78
(9800.99)

iii)	 rduhdh@foosdiw.kZ cês [kkrs esa Mkyuk
12495.85*
(13362.86)
12495.85
(13362.86)

iv)	 Åij ¼iii½ ds rgr ds vykok vU; dks 
cês [kkrs esa Mkyuk

3761.37
(3215.14)
3761.37
(3215.14)

¼jkf'k ₹ djksM+ esa½

**ekud
vutZd
dqy
dqy ekud 
vfxze
voekud
lafnX/k
gkfu
dqy vutZd 
vfxze**

**çkoèkku ¼mrkj&p<+ko çkoèkkuksa dks NksM+dj½**

èkkfjr çkoèkkuksa dk çkjafHkd 'ks"k
7746.99
(5986.96)
1793.48
(2649.76)
30479.17
(37253.77)
21551.14
(16953.10)
53823.79
(56856.63)
61570.78
(62843.59)

tksM+sa% o"kZ ds nkSjku fd, x, u, çkoèkku 
18217.40
(18660.80

**?kVk,a% vfrfjä çkoèkku fjolZM@cês [kkrs 
esa Mkys x, _.k**

23327.74
(21693.64)

**èkkfjr çkoèkkuksa dk vafre 'ks"k
7768.19
(7746.99)
1934.27
(1793.48)
35048.10
(30479.17)
11731.08
(21551.14)
48713.45
(53823.79)
56481.64
(61570.78)**

----

**4.	
Asset Quality**

**4.	
a)	
Classification of advances and provisions held**

(Amount in ₹ crore)

**Standard
Non-Performing**

**Total
Total 
Standard 
Advances**

**Sub- 
standard
Doubtful
Loss
Total Non- 
Performing 
Advances**

**Gross Standard Advances and NPAs**

Opening Balance
807353.02
(692656.32)
12226.61
(16401.47)
43413.63
(59009.18)
21687.43
(17037.39)
77327.67
(92448.04)
884680.69
(785104.36)

Add: Additions during the Year
5826.20
(16028.92)

Less: Reductions during the Year *
26810.81
(31149.29)

**Closing balance
926981.65
(807353.02)
4875.91
(12226.61)
39550.75
(43413.63)
11916.39
(21687.43)
56343.05
(77327.67)
983324.70
(884680.69)**

*Reductions in Gross NPAs due to:

i)	
Upgradation
3447.81
(4770.30)
3447.81
(4770.30)

ii)	 Recoveries (excluding recoveries 
from upgraded accounts)
7105.78
(9800.99)
7105.78
(9800.99)

iii)	 Technical/ Prudential Write-offs
12495.85*
(13362.86)
12495.85
(13362.86)

iv)	 Write-offs other than those under (iii) 
above
3761.37
(3215.14)
3761.37
(3215.14)

*After netting off unmarking of TWO a/c of Rs. 2060.14 Crores in line with the Bank’s Policy for Technical Write-off

(Amount in ₹ crore)

**Standard
Non-Performing**

**Total
Total 
Standard 
Advances**

**Sub- 
standard
Doubtful
Loss
Total Non- 
Performing 
Advances**

**Provisions (excluding Floating Provisions)**

Opening balance of provisions held
7746.99
(5986.96)
1793.48
(2649.76)
30479.17
(37253.77)
21551.14
(16953.10)
53823.79
(56856.63)
61570.78
(62843.59)

Add: Fresh provisions made during the 
Year 
18217.40
(18660.80

Less: Excess provision reversed/ Write-
off loans
23327.74
(21693.64)

**Closing balance of provisions held
7768.19
(7746.99)
1934.27
(1793.48)
35048.10
(30479.17)
11731.08
(21551.14)
48713.45
(53823.79)
56481.64
(61570.78)**

----

¼jkf'k ₹ djksM+ esa½

¼jkf'k ₹ djksM+ esa½

150.00
(0.00)

?kVk,a% o"kZ ds nkSjku vkgfjr jkf'k
0.00
(0.00)
mrkj&p<+ko çkoèkkuksa dk vafre 'ks"k
150.00
(0.00)

¼jkf'k ₹ djksM+ esa½

95122.55
(97300.75)

14695.31
(13538.42)

18652.11
(15716.62)

vafre 'ks"k
91165.75
(95122.55)

¼jkf'k ₹ djksM+ esa½

**vuqikr ¼izfr'kr esa½
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

ldy ,uih, ls ldy vfxze
5.73%
8.74%

fuoy ,uih, ls fuoy vfxze
0.73%
2.72%

çkoèkku dojst vuqikr
95.39%
86.90%

----

(Amount in ₹ crore)

**Standard
Non-Performing**

**Total
Total 
Standard 
Advances**

**Sub- 
standard
Doubtful
Loss
Total Non- 
Performing 
Advances**

**Net NPAs**

Opening balance
10433.12
(13751.71)
12015.63
(21072.72)
136.29
(84.30)
22585.04
(34908.73)

Add: Fresh additions during the year
3519.69
(10852.35)

Less: Reductions during the year
19305.96
(23176.04)

**Closing Balance
2941.65
(10433.12)
3671.81
(12015.63)
185.31
(136.29)
6978.77
(22585.04)
6978.77
(22585.04)**

(Amount in ₹ crore)

**Standard
Non-Performing**

**Total
Total 
Standard 
Advances**

**Sub- 
standard
Doubtful
Loss
Total Non- 
Performing 
Advances**

**Floating Provisions**

Opening balance
0.00
(0.00)

Add: Additional provisions made during 
the Year
150.00
(0.00)

Less: Amount drawn down during the 
Year
0.00
(0.00)

**Closing balance of floating provisions
150.00
(0.00)**

(Amount in ₹ crore)

**Standard
Non-Performing
Total**

**Total 
Standard 
Advances**

**Sub- 
standard
Doubtful
Loss
Total Non- 
Performing 
Advances**

**Technical write-offs and the recoveries  made thereon**

Opening balance of Technical/Prudential 
written-off accounts
95122.55
(97300.75)

Add: Technical/ Prudential write-offs 
during the Year 
14695.31
(13538.42)

Less: Recoveries made from previously 
technical/ prudential written-off accounts 
during the Year

18652.11
(15716.62)

**Closing balance
91165.75
(95122.55)**

(Amount in ₹ crore)

**Ratios (in per cent)
Current Year
Previous Year**

Gross NPA to Gross Advances
5.73%
8.74%

Net NPA to Net Advances
0.73%
2.72%

Provision Coverage Ratio
95.39%
86.90%

----

**Ø-la-
{ks=**

**31.03.2024 dks
31.03.2023 dks
cdk;k dqy 
vfxze
ldy 
,uih,
ldy ,uih, dk 
ml {ks= esa dqy 
vfxzeksa dk çfr'kr**

2
çkFkfedrk&çkIr {ks= dks mèkkj ds 
:i esa ik= m|ksx {ks= dks vfxze

48757.77
6020.69
12.35%
47239.16
7435.81
15.74%

 
ftlesa ls 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
vk;ju vkSj LVhy 
 
 
 
5219.31
606.23
11.62%

3
lsok,a
90642.21
13709.39
15.12%
81885.58
16833.41
20.56%

4
O;fäxr _.k
33240.69
1829.62
5.50%
33508.80
2156.37
6.44%

 
ftlesa ls
 
 
 
 
 
 

f'k{kk _.k 
5245.27
727.02
13.86%
6482.91
885.02
13.65%

vkokl _.k 
27923.25
1074.32
3.85%
26956.32
1236.63
4.59%

**mi tksM+ (i)
292962.07
42807.21
14.61%
269181.52
51909.35
19.28%**

2
m|ksx
122938.43
4988.65
4.06%
126556.63
14313.59
11.31%

 
ftlesa ls 
 
 
 
 
 
 

fctyh mRiknu  
17384.34
1216.77
7.00%
16344.71
470.91
2.88%

vk;ju vkSj LVhy 
16210.33
265.84
1.64%
15006.73
330.54
2.20%

lM+dsa vkSj iqy 
29843.83
782.88
2.62%
27736.38
1130.75
4.08%

3
lsok,a
239198.91
526.35
0.22%
191433.12
2222.31
1.16%

,uch,Qlh,l 
113316.54
6.27
0.01%
102933.01
14.00
0.01%

4
O;fäxr _.k
290358.91
7289.17
2.51%
261931.60
8272.74
3.16%

 
ftlesa ls
 
 
 
 
 
 

vkokl _.k 
108190.14
1656.63
1.53%
62828.19
2037.53
3.24%

caèkd _.k
19812.99
670.94
3.39%
25512.05
812.78
3.19%

okgu@v‚Vks _.k 
23766.16
508.59
2.14%
44414.89
539.75
1.22%

 
mi tksM+ (ii)
690362.62
13535.84
1.96%
615499.16
25418.32
4.13%

 
dqy (i+ii)
983324.70
56343.05
5.73%
884680.69
77327.67
8.74%

fooj.k
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ
dqy vkfLr;ka
70205.70
61211.00
dqy ,uih,
1695.86
1676.86
dqy jktLo
3672.18
2052.77

----

**4.	
b)	 Sector-wise Advances and Gross NPAs**

(Amount in ₹ crore)

**Sl. 
No.
Sector**

**AS ON 31.03.2024
AS ON 31.03.2023**

**Outstanding 
Total 
Advances**

**Gross 
NPAs
Percentage of 
Gross NPAs to 
Total Advances in 
that sector**

**Outstanding 
Total 
Advances**

**Gross 
NPAs
Percentage of 
Gross NPAs to 
Total Advances 
in that sector**

**Priority Sector**

1
Agriculture and allied activities
120321.34
21247.52
17.66%
106547.99
25483.76
23.92%

2
Advances to industries sector 
eligible as priority sector 
lending

48757.77
6020.69
12.35%
47239.16
7435.81
15.74%

 
of which
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Iron and Steel
 
 
 
5219.31
606.23
11.62%

3
Services
90642.21
13709.39
15.12%
81885.58
16833.41
20.56%

4
Personal Loan
33240.69
1829.62
5.50%
33508.80
2156.37
6.44%

 
of which
 
 
 
 
 
 

Education loans
5245.27
727.02
13.86%
6482.91
885.02
13.65%

Housing loans
27923.25
1074.32
3.85%
26956.32
1236.63
4.59%

**Sub-total (i)
292962.07
42807.21
14.61%
269181.52
51909.35
19.28%**

**Non Priority Sector**

1
Agriculture and allied activities
37866.38
731.68
1.93%
35577.81
609.68
1.71%

2
Industry
122938.43
4988.65
4.06%
126556.63
14313.59
11.31%

 
of which
 
 
 
 
 
 

Electricity Generation 
17384.34
1216.77
7.00%
16344.71
470.91
2.88%

Iron and Steel
16210.33
265.84
1.64%
15006.73
330.54
2.20%

Roads and Bridges
29843.83
782.88
2.62%
27736.38
1130.75
4.08%

3
Services
239198.91
526.35
0.22%
191433.12
2222.31
1.16%

NBFCS
113316.54
6.27
0.01%
102933.01
14.00
0.01%

4
Personal Loan
290358.91
7289.17
2.51%
261931.60
8272.74
3.16%

 
of which
 
 
 
 
 
 

Housing loans
108190.14
1656.63
1.53%
62828.19
2037.53
3.24%

Mortgage loan
19812.99
670.94
3.39%
25512.05
812.78
3.19%

Vehicle/auto loans
23766.16
508.59
2.14%
44414.89
539.75
1.22%

 
Sub-total (ii)
690362.62
13535.84
1.96%
615499.16
25418.32
4.13%

 
Total (i+ii)
983324.70
56343.05
5.73%
884680.69
77327.67
8.74%

**4.	
c)	
Overseas assets, NPAs and revenue**

(Amount in ₹ crore)

**Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

Total Assets
70205.70
61211.00

Total NPAs
1695.86
1676.86

Total Revenue
3672.18
2052.77

----

4-	 Mh½	 lekèkku ;kstuk vkSj iquxZBu dk fooj.k

fooj.k
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ

[kkrksa dh la[;k
jkf'k
[kkrksa dh la[;k
jkf'k

iquxZBu vkfn ds vèkhu _.k vkfLr;ksa dh dqy jkf'k
04
3392.73
10
3358.52

iquxZBu vkfn ds vèkhu voekud vkfLr;ksa dh jkf'k
04
3392.73
10
3358.52

1
Re. 1
6
331.82

vkjchvkÃ ifji= 
ls çHkkfor 
_.k dh jkf'k 
¼,Qch$,u,Qch½

31-03-2024 
rd _.k 
,uih, dh jkf'k 
¼,½ ls ckgj 
¼,Qch$,u,Qch½

31-03-2024 dks 
¼ch½ esa ls _.k 
dh jkf'k ,uih, 
¼,Qch½

31-03-2024 rd 
_.k dh jkf'k 
ekud ¼,½ ls 
ckgj

31-12-2023 rd 
j[kk x;k  
dqy vfrfjä 
çkoèkku

31-03-2024 dks 
lekIr frekgh ds 
nkSjku vfrfjä 
çkoèkku@¼fjolZy½ 
fd;k x;k

31-03-2024 
rd èkkfjr  
çkoèkku

6396.95
3392.77
434.75
3004.18
2308.36
(112.18)
2196.18

vkjchvkÃ ifji= 
ls çHkkfor 
_.kksa dh jkf'k 
¼,Qch$,u,Qch½

,uih, ds :i esa 
oxÊ—r fd, tkus 
okys _.k dh jkf'k 
¼,Qch½

,uih, ds :i esa 
oxÊ—r ¼ch½ esa ls  
31-03-2023 dks _.k 
dh jkf'k ¼,Qch½

31-12-2022 
rd èkkfjr 
çkoèkku

31-03-2023 frekgh 
ds nkSjku fd;k x;k 
vfrfjä çkoèkku

31-03-2023 rd èkkfjr 
çkoèkku

8794.28
3414.48
3414.48
2712.17
-341.14
2371.03

----

**4.	
d)	 Particulars of resolution plan and restructuring**

**4.	
d)	 i)	
Disclosure related to Resolution Plan implemented during the year in terms of RBI Circular No. DBR.No.BP.
BC.45/21.04.048/2018-19 dated 07.06.2019**

(Amount in ₹ crore)

**Particulars
Current Year 
Previous Year**

**No. of Accts
Amount
No. of Accts
Amount**

**Total amount of Loan assets subjected to restructuring etc.
04
3392.73
10
3358.52**

**The amount of standard assets subjected to restructuring etc.
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL**

**The amount of Sub-standard assets subjected to restructuring etc.
04
3392.73
10
3358.52**

**Acquisition of shares due to conversion of equity on re-structuring 
during the year
1
Re. 1
6
331.82**

**4	
d)	 ii)	 In terms of RBI Circular DBR No. BP. BC 45/21.04.048/2018-19 dated June 7, 2019 on Prudential Framework for 
Resolution of Stressed Assets, having total banking exposure of Rs.1500.00 Crore and above, the Bank is holding 
additional provision of Rs.2196.18 Crore as on March 31, 2024 in 21 accounts as summarized below:**

(Amount in ₹ crore)

**Amount of loans 
impacted by 
RBI Circular 
(FB+NFB)**

**Amount of 
Loans NPA as on 
31.03.2024 out of 
(a) (FB+NFB)**

**Amount of 
loans NPA as on 
31.03.2024 out of 
(b)  (FB)**

**Amount of loans 
Standard as on 
31.03.2024 out 
of (a)**

**Total Additional 
Provision held as 
on 31.12.2023**

**Additional Provision 
/ (Reversal) made 
during quarter 
ended 31.03.2024**

**Total 
Provision 
held as on 
31.03.2024**

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

6396.95
3392.77
434.75
3004.18
2308.36
(112.18)
2196.18

**Previous Year (FY 2022-23) In terms of RBI Circular DBR No. BP. BC 45/21.04.048/2018-19 dated June 7, 2019 on Prudential 
Framework for Resolution of Stressed Assets, the Bank is holding additional provision of Rs. 2371.03 Crore as on March 31, 2023 
in 18 accounts as detailed below:**

(Amount in ₹ crore)

**Amount of loans 
impacted by RBI 
Circular (FB+NFB)**

**Amount of Loans 
to be classified as 
NPA (FB)**

**Amount of loans as on 
31.03.2023 out of (b) 
classified as NPA (FB)**

**Provision 
held as on 
31.12.2022**

**Additional Provision 
made during quarter 
ended 31.03.2023**

**Provision held as on 
31.03.2023**

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

8794.28
3414.48
3414.48
2712.17
-341.14
2371.03

----

**4-	 Mh½	 iii)	   iquxZfBr [kkrksa dk izdVhdj.k**

**la-**

**LVS.MMZ**

**lafnX/k
gkfu
dqy
LVS.MMZ
lc&**

**LVS.MMZ**

**lafnX/k
gkfu
dqy
LVS.MMZ
lc&**

**LVS.MMZ**

**lafnX/k
gkfu
dqy
LVS.MMZ
lc&**

**LVS.MMZ**

**lafnX/k
gkfu
dqy**

1
1 vçSy 2023 
rd ¼çkjafHkd 
vkadM+s½

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
0
2
0
2
175
16
134
0
325
182
9
114
0
305.00
357
25
250
0
632

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
0.00
6373.89
0.00
6373.89
2921.01
1373.73
8594.19
0.00
12888.93
758598.83
66.29
36151.27
0.00
794816.39
761519.84
1440.42
51119.35
0.00
814079.21
ml ij 
çkoèkku
0.00
0.00
219.59
0.00
219.59
239.35
17.56
2901.94
0.00
3158.85
29594.20
1.37
104.34
0.00
29699.91
29833.55
18.93
3225.87
0.00
33078.35

2

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
1
0
8
882
18
1
0
901.00
882
25
2
0
909

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
0.00
-2.26
0.00
-2.26
0.00
1060.98
315.31
0.00
1376.29
6155.00
182.87
14.57
0.00
6353.30
6155.86
1243.85
327.62
0.00
7727.33
ml ij 
çkoèkku
0.00
0.00
-47.74
0.00
-47.74
0.00
53.04
15.77
0.00
68.81
615.59
0.55
0.04
0.00
616.18
615.59
53.59
-31.93
0.00
637.25

3

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
0
0
0
0
7
-4
-3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
7
-4
-3
0
0

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
291.83
-280.13
-11.70
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
291.83
-280.13
-11.70
0.00
0.00
ml ij 
çkoèkku
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
14.60
-14.01
-0.59
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
14.60
-14.01
-0.59
0.00
0.00

4

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

**ml ij 
çkoèkku**

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

5

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
0
0
0
0
-8
1
7
0
0
-53.00
-1
-107
0
-161.00
-61
0
-100
0
-161

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-94.15
66.75
27.40
0.00
0.00
-990.92
0.00
-19020.51
0.00
-20011.43
-1085.07
66.75
-18993.11
0.00
-20011.43
ml ij 
çkoèkku
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-4.71
3.34
1.37
0.00
0.00
-49.55
0.00
-64.28
0.00
-113.83
-54.26
3.34
-62.91
0.00
-113.83

6

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
0
0
0
0
-27
-5
-46
0
-78
-78
0
0
0
-78.00
-105
-5
-46
0
-156

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-590.27
-1066.19
-1131.74
0.00
-2788.20
-128499.82
-60.07
-16544.81
0.00
-145104.70
-129090.99
-1126.26
-17676.55
0.00
-147892.90
ml ij 
çkoèkku
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.60
-2.17
-133.57
0.00
-132.14
-5948.75
-1.06
-1.11
0.00
-5950.92
-5945.15
-3.23
-134.68
0.00
-6083.06

7
31 ekpZ] 24 
dks [kkrksa dk 
iquxZBu ¼vafre 
vkadM+s½

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
0
2
0
2
147
15
93
0
255
933
26
8
0
967
1080
41
103
0
1224

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
0.00
6371.63
0.00
6371.63
2528.42
1155.14
7793.46
0.00
11477.02
635263.95
189.09
600.52
0.00
636053.56
637729.37
1344.23
14765.61
0.00
653902.21
ml ij 
çkoèkku
0.00
0.00
171.85
0.00
171.85
252.84
57.76
2784.92
0.00
3095.52
24211.49
0.86
38.99
0.00
24251.34
24464.33
58.62
2995.76
0.00
27.518.71

----

**4.	
d)	 iii).      Disclosure of Restructured Accounts**

**31.03.2024 (Current Year)
(Amount in ₹ Lakhs)**

**Disclosure of Restructured Accounts (As on 31.03.2024) as per revised guidelines Under**

**SI 
No.
Type of Restructuring →
Under CDR Mechanism
Under SME Debt Restructuring Mechanism
Others
Total**

Assest Classification →
Standard
Sub-
Standard
Doubtful
Loss
Total
Standard
Sub-
Standard
Doubtful
Loss
Total
Standard
Sub-
Standard
Doubtful
Loss
Total
Standard
Sub-
Standard
Doubtful
Loss
Total

**Details
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)**

1

Restructured 
Accounts as 
on April 1 2023 
(opening figure)

No. of 
borrowers
0
0
2
0
2
175
16
134
0
325
182
9
114
0
305.00
357
25
250
0
632

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
0.00
6373.89
0.00
6373.89
2921.01
1373.73
8594.19
0.00
12888.93
758598.83
66.29
36151.27
0.00
794816.39
761519.84
1440.42
51119.35
0.00
814079.21

Provision 
thereon
0.00
0.00
219.59
0.00
219.59
239.35
17.56
2901.94
0.00
3158.85
29594.20
1.37
104.34
0.00
29699.91
29833.55
18.93
3225.87
0.00
33078.35

2

Fresh restructuring 
during the year 
2023-24 (plus 
addition in o/s in 
existing a/cs)

No. of 
borrowers
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
1
0
8
882
18
1
0
901.00
882
25
2
0
909

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
0.00
-2.26
0.00
-2.26
0.00
1060.98
315.31
0.00
1376.29
6155.00
182.87
14.57
0.00
6353.30
6155.86
1243.85
327.62
0.00
7727.33

Provision 
thereon
0.00
0.00
-47.74
0.00
-47.74
0.00
53.04
15.77
0.00
68.81
615.59
0.55
0.04
0.00
616.18
615.59
53.59
-31.93
0.00
637.25

3

Upgradation 
to restructured 
standard category 
during the FY 
2023-24

No. of 
borrowers
0
0
0
0
0
7
-4
-3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
7
-4
-3
0
0

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
291.83
-280.13
-11.70
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
291.83
-280.13
-11.70
0.00
0.00

Provision 
thereon
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
14.60
-14.01
-0.59
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
14.60
-14.01
-0.59
0.00
0.00

4

Restructured 
standard advances 
at the begining of 
the FY 2023-24, 
which cease to 
attract higher 
provisionining and 
/ or additional risk 
weight at the end 
of FY 2023-24 
and hence need 
not be shown 
as restructured 
standard

No. of 
borrowers
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Provision 
thereon
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

5

downgrada-tion 
of restructured 
accounts during the 
FY 2023-24

No. of 
borrowers
0
0
0
0
0
-8
1
7
0
0
-53.00
-1
-107
0
-161.00
-61
0
-100
0
-161

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-94.15
66.75
27.40
0.00
0.00
-990.92
0.00
-19020.51
0.00
-20011.43
-1085.07
66.75
-18993.11
0.00
-20011.43

Provision 
thereon
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-4.71
3.34
1.37
0.00
0.00
-49.55
0.00
-64.28
0.00
-113.83
-54.26
3.34
-62.91
0.00
-113.83

6

Write-offs of 
restructured 
accounts during the 
FY 2023-24

No. of 
borrowers
0
0
0
0
0
-27
-5
-46
0
-78
-78
0
0
0
-78.00
-105
-5
-46
0
-156

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-590.27
-1066.19
-1131.74
0.00
-2788.20
-128499.82
-60.07
-16544.81
0.00
-145104.70
-129090.99
-1126.26
-17676.55
0.00
-147892.90

Provision 
thereon
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.60
-2.17
-133.57
0.00
-132.14
-5948.75
-1.06
-1.11
0.00
-5950.92
-5945.15
-3.23
-134.68
0.00
-6083.06

7

Accounts 
Restructured as on 
Mar 31, 24 (Closing 
Figures)

No. of 
borrowers
0
0
2
0
2
147
15
93
0
255
933
26
8
0
967
1080
41
103
0
1224

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
0.00
6371.63
0.00
6371.63
2528.42
1155.14
7793.46
0.00
11477.02
635263.95
189.09
600.52
0.00
636053.56
637729.37
1344.23
14765.61
0.00
653902.21

Provision 
thereon
0.00
0.00
171.85
0.00
171.85
252.84
57.76
2784.92
0.00
3095.52
24211.49
0.86
38.99
0.00
24251.34
24464.33
58.62
2995.76
0.00
27.518.71

----

**4-	 Mh½	 iii)	   iquxZfBr [kkrksa dk izdVhdj.k**

**la-**

**LVS.MMZ**

**lafnX/k
gkfu
dqy
LVS.MMZ
lc&**

**LVS.MMZ**

**lafnX/k
gkfu
dqy
LVS.MMZ
lc&**

**LVS.MMZ**

**lafnX/k
gkfu
dqy
LVS.MMZ
lc& LVS.**

**MMZ**

**lafnX/k
gkfu
dqy**

1
1 vçSy 2022 rd 
¼çkjafHkd vkadM+s½

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
2
3
0
5
233
47
141
0
421
6,704
1671
774
0
9,149.00
6,937
1,720
918
0
9,575

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
7001.01
72400.87
0.00
79,401.88
5,488.05
4531.64
26651.01
0.00
36,670.70
4,62,037.99
102053.80
99247.67
0.00
6,63,339.46
4,67,526.04
1,13,586.45
1,98,299.55
0.00
7,79,412.04
ml ij 
çkoèkku
0.00
222.83
786.84
0.00
1,009.66
537.00
1412.52
2624.55
0.00
4,574.07
16,708.87
541.73
5882.30
0.00
23,132.90
17,245.87
2,177.08
9,293.69
0.00
28,716.64

2

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
0
2
0
2
0
0
1
0
1
34
127
120
0
281.00
34
127
123
0
284

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
0.00
6373.89
0
6,373.89
0.00
0.00
1426.19
0
1,426.19
6,55,979.83
194.83
47791.22
0.00
7,03,965.88
6,55,979.83
194.83
55,591.30
0.00
7,11,765.96
ml ij 
çkoèkku
0.00
0.00
219.59
0.00
219.59
0.00
0.00
196.40
0.00
196.40
13,366.04
7.80
102.68
0.00
13,476.52
13,366.04
7.80
518.67
0.00
13,892.51

3

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
0
0
0
0
1
-1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1.00
2
-1
0
0
1

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.60
-0.60
0.00
0.00
0.00
32.66
0
0.00
0.00
32.66
33.26
-0.60
0.00
0.00
32.66
ml ij 
çkoèkku
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03
-0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0
0
0.00
0.01
0.04
-0.03
0.00
0.00
0.01

4

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0
0
0
0
0

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

**ml ij 
çkoèkku**

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

5

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
-2
0
0
-2
-70
1
69
0
0
-6160.00
-5
-780
0
-6,945.00
-6,230
-6
-711
0
-6,947

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
-7001.01
0.00
0.00
-7001.01
-2,049.31
-2077.16
4,126.47
0.00
0.00
-349385.22
-66848.25
-110600.65
0.00
-5,26,834.12
-3,51,434.53
-75,926.42
-1,06,474.18
0.00
-5,33,835.13
ml ij 
çkoèkku
0.00
-222.83
0.00
0.00
-222.83
-24.24
-20.77
45.01
0.00
0.00
620.64
-276.87
-5870.43
0.00
-5,526.66
596.40
-520.47
-5,825.42
0.00
-5,749.49

6

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
0
-3
0
-3
11
-31
-77
0
-97
-397
-1784
0
0
-2,181.00
-386
-1,815
-80
0
-2,281

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
0.00
-72,400.87
0.00
-72400.87
-518.33
-1080.15
-23609.48
0.00
-25,207.96
-10066.43
-35334.09
-286.96
0.00
-45,687.48
-10,584.76
-36,414.24
-96,297.31
0.00
-1,43,296.31
ml ij 
çkoèkku
0.00
0.00
-786.84
0.00
-786.84
-273.44
-1374.16
35.98
0.00
-1,611.62
-1101.36
-271.29
-10.21
0.00
-1,382.86
-1,374.80
-1,645.45
-761.07
0.00
-3,781.32

7
31 ekpZ] 23 dks 
[kkrksa dk iquxZBu 
¼vafre vkadM+s½

mèkkjdrkZvksa 
dh la[;k
0
0
2
0
2
175
16
134
0
325
182
9
114
0
305.00
357
25
250
0
632

cdk;k jkf'k
0.00
0.00
6,373.89
0.00
6,373.89
2,921.01
1,373.73
8,594.19
0
12,888.93
7,58,598.83
66.29
36,151.28
0
7,94,816.40
7,61,519.84
1,440.02
51,119.36
0.00
8,14,079.22
ml ij 
çkoèkku
0.00
0.00
219.59
0.00
219.58
239.35
17.56
2,901.94
0
3,158.85
29,594.20
1.37
104.34
0
29,699.91
29,833.55
18.93
3,225.87
0.00
33,078.35

----

**4.	
d)	 iii).      Disclosure of Restructured Accounts**

**31.03.2023 (Previous Year)
(Amount in ₹ Lakhs)**

**Disclosure of Restructured Accounts (As on 31.03.2023) as per revised guidelines Under**

**SI 
No.
Type of Restructuring →
Under CDR Mechanism
Under SME Debt Restructuring Mechanism
Others
Total**

Assest Classification →
Standard
Sub-
Standard
Doubtful
Loss
Total
Standard
Sub-
Standard
Doubtful
Loss
Total
Standard
Sub-
Standard
Doubtful
Loss
Total
Standard
Sub-
Standard
Doubtful
Loss
Total

**Details
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)**

1

Restructured 
Accounts as 
on April 1 2022 
(opening figure)

No. of 
borrowers
0
2
3
0
5
233
47
141
0
421
6,704
1671
774
0
9,149.00
6,937
1,720
918
0
9,575

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
7001.01
72400.87
0.00
79,401.88
5,488.05
4531.64
26651.01
0.00
36,670.70
4,62,037.99
102053.80
99247.67
0.00
6,63,339.46
4,67,526.04
1,13,586.45
1,98,299.55
0.00
7,79,412.04

Provision 
thereon
0.00
222.83
786.84
0.00
1,009.66
537.00
1412.52
2624.55
0.00
4,574.07
16,708.87
541.73
5882.30
0.00
23,132.90
17,245.87
2,177.08
9,293.69
0.00
28,716.64

2

Fresh 
restructuring 
during the year 
2022-23 (plus 
addition in o/s in 
existing a/cs)

No. of 
borrowers
0
0
2
0
2
0
0
1
0
1
34
127
120
0
281.00
34
127
123
0
284

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
0.00
6373.89
0
6,373.89
0.00
0.00
1426.19
0
1,426.19
6,55,979.83
194.83
47791.22
0.00
7,03,965.88
6,55,979.83
194.83
55,591.30
0.00
7,11,765.96

Provision 
thereon
0.00
0.00
219.59
0.00
219.59
0.00
0.00
196.40
0.00
196.40
13,366.04
7.80
102.68
0.00
13,476.52
13,366.04
7.80
518.67
0.00
13,892.51

3

Upgradation 
to restructured 
standard category 
during the FY 
2022-23

No. of 
borrowers
0
0
0
0
0
1
-1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1.00
2
-1
0
0
1

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.60
-0.60
0.00
0.00
0.00
32.66
0
0.00
0.00
32.66
33.26
-0.60
0.00
0.00
32.66

Provision 
thereon
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03
-0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0
0
0.00
0.01
0.04
-0.03
0.00
0.00
0.01

4

Restructured 
standard 
advances at the 
begining of the 
FY 2022-23, 
which cease to 
attract higher 
provisionining and 
/ or additional risk 
weight at the end 
of FY 2022-23 
and hence need 
not be shown 
as restructured 
standard

No. of 
borrowers
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0
0
0
0
0

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Provision 
thereon
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

5

downgrada-tion 
of restructured 
accounts during 
the FY 2022-23

No. of 
borrowers
0
-2
0
0
-2
-70
1
69
0
0
-6160.00
-5
-780
0
-6,945.00
-6,230
-6
-711
0
-6,947

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
-7001.01
0.00
0.00
-7001.01
-2,049.31
-2077.16
4,126.47
0.00
0.00
-349385.22
-66848.25
-110600.65
0.00
-5,26,834.12
-3,51,434.53
-75,926.42
-1,06,474.18
0.00
-5,33,835.13

Provision 
thereon
0.00
-222.83
0.00
0.00
-222.83
-24.24
-20.77
45.01
0.00
0.00
620.64
-276.87
-5870.43
0.00
-5,526.66
596.40
-520.47
-5,825.42
0.00
-5,749.49

6

Write-offs of 
restructured 
accounts during 
the FY 2022-23

No. of 
borrowers
0
0
-3
0
-3
11
-31
-77
0
-97
-397
-1784
0
0
-2,181.00
-386
-1,815
-80
0
-2,281

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
0.00
-72,400.87
0.00
-72400.87
-518.33
-1080.15
-23609.48
0.00
-25,207.96
-10066.43
-35334.09
-286.96
0.00
-45,687.48
-10,584.76
-36,414.24
-96,297.31
0.00
-1,43,296.31

Provision 
thereon
0.00
0.00
-786.84
0.00
-786.84
-273.44
-1374.16
35.98
0.00
-1,611.62
-1101.36
-271.29
-10.21
0.00
-1,382.86
-1,374.80
-1,645.45
-761.07
0.00
-3,781.32

7

Accounts 
Restructured as 
on Mar 31, 23 
(Closing Figures)

No. of 
borrowers
0
0
2
0
2
175
16
134
0
325
182
9
114
0
305.00
357
25
250
0
632

Amount 
outstanding
0.00
0.00
6,373.89
0.00
6,373.89
2,921.01
1,373.73
8,594.19
0
12,888.93
7,58,598.83
66.29
36,151.28
0
7,94,816.40
7,61,519.84
1,440.02
51,119.36
0.00
8,14,079.22

Provision 
thereon
0.00
0.00
219.59
0.00
219.58
239.35
17.56
2,901.94
0
3,158.85
29,594.20
1.37
104.34
0
29,699.91
29,833.55
18.93
3,225.87
0.00
33,078.35

----

**fooj.k
[kkrksa dh la[;k tgka 
,l4, ykxw fd;k x;k gS
dqy cdk;k jkf'k
cdk;k jkf'k
/kkfjr izko/kku
Hkkx , esa
Hkkx ch esa**

31.03.2024 dks
ekud ds :i esa oxÊ—r
3
998.84
102.84
896.00
853.63

,uih, ds :i esa oxÊ—r
2
323.12
14.21
308.91
323.12

31.03.2023 dks
ekud ds :i esa oxÊ—r
2
146.54
48.95
97.59
50.52

,uih, ds :i esa oxÊ—r
5
2359.25
934.12
1425.13
2336.42

[kkrksa dh la[;k 
tgka ,lMhvkj 
ykxw dh xÃ gS

[kkrksa dh 
la[‍;k tgka 
cSad us 

L‍okfeR‍o esa 
ifjorZu 
djus dk 
fu.kZ; fy;k 
gSA

vofèk
vfLFkj lajpuk 
esa fy, x, 
mèkkjdrkZvksa dh 
la[;k

----

**4.	
d)	 iv)   Disclosures on the Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of Stressed Assets (S4A), as on 31.03.2024**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Particulars
No. of accounts where 
S4A has been applied
Aggregate amount 
outstanding
Amount outstanding
Provision Held**

**In Part A
In Part B**

**As on 31.03.2024**

Classified as Standard
3
998.84
102.84
896.00
853.63

Classified as NPA
2
323.12
14.21
308.91
323.12

**As on 31.03.2023**

Classified as Standard
2
146.54
48.95
97.59
50.52

Classified as NPA
5
2359.25
934.12
1425.13
2336.42

**4.	
d)	 v)    Disclosures on Strategic Debt Restructuring Scheme**

**(Accounts which are currently under the stand-still period) as on 31.03.2024**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**No. of 
accounts 
where SDR 
has been 
invoked**

**Amount outstanding as on the 
reporting date
Amount outstanding as on the 
reporting date with respect to 
accounts where conversion of debt 
to equity is pending**

**Amount outstanding as on the 
reporting date with respect to 
accounts where conversion of debt 
to equity has been taken place**

**Classified as 
Standard
Classified as 
NPA
Classified as 
Standard
Classified as NPA
Classified as 
Standard
Classified as NPA**

Current Year 31.03.2024: NIL

Previous Year 31.03.2023: NIL

**4.	
d)	 vi)   Disclosures on Change in ownership outside Strategic Debt Restructuring Scheme (accounts which are currently  
                       under the stand-still period):**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**No. of 
accounts 
where banks 
have decided 
to effect 
change in 
ownership**

**Amount outstanding as 
on the reporting date 
 i.e. 31.03.2024**

**Amount outstanding as 
on the reporting date 
with respect to accounts 
where conversion of debt 
to equity/invocation of 
pledge of equity shares is 
pending**

**Amount outstanding as 
on the reporting date 
with respect to accounts 
where conversion of debt 
to equity/invocation of 
pledge of equity shares 
has taken place**

**Amount outstanding as 
on the reporting date with 
respect to accounts where 
change in ownership is 
envisaged by issuance 
of fresh shares or sale of 
promoters equity**

**Classified 
as Standard
Classified 
as NPA
Classified 
as Standard
Classified 
as NPA
Classified 
as Standard
Classified 
as NPA
Classified 
as Standard
Classified as 
NPA**

Current Year 31.03.2024 : NIL

Previous Year 31.03.2023: NIL

**4.	
d)	 vii)    Disclosures on application of Flexible Structuring to Existing Loans as on 31.03.2024:**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Period
No. of borrowers 
taken up 
for flexible 
structuring**

**Amount of loans taken up for flexible 
structuring
Exposure weighted average duration of 
loans taken up for flexible structuring**

**Classified as 
Standard
Classified as 
NPA
Before applying 
flexible structuring
After applying 
flexible structuring**

Current Year 31.03.2024: NIL

Previous Year 31.03.2023: NIL

----

**4.	
d)	 viii)	 Disclosures on Change in Ownership of Projects 
Under Implementation (accounts which are 
currently under the stand-still period):**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**No. of project 
loan accounts 
where banks 
have decided to 
effect change in 
ownership**

**Amount outstanding as on the reporting 
date i.e. 31.03.2024**

**Classified 
as Standard
Classified 
as Standard 
restructured**

**Classified 
as NPA**

Current Year: NIL

Previous Year: NIL

**4.	
e)	
Divergence in Asset Classification and Provisioning**

As per RBI Master Direction on Financial Statements - Presentation 
and Disclosures No. DOR.ACC.REC.N0.45/21.04.018/2021-22 
dated August 30, 2021 (updated as on October 25, 2023), in case 
the additional provisioning for NPAs assessed by RBI as part of 
its supervisory process, exceeds 5% of the reported profit before 
provisions and contingencies for the reference period and/or 
additional gross NPAs identified by RBI as part of its supervisory 
process, exceed 5% of the reported incremental Gross NPAs 
for the reference period, then the banks are required to disclose 
divergence from prudential norms on income recognition, assets 
classification and provisioning.

No divergences on the above aspect has been assessed by 
RBI, hence no disclosure is required with respect to RBl’s annual 
supervisory process for FY 2022-23.

(Previous year Disclosure on divergence in Asset classification and 
provisioning for NPAs is not required w.r.t. RBI’s annual supervisory 
process for the year ended March 31, 2022 based on conditions 
mentioned in RBI Master Direction no. RBI/DOR/2021-22/83 
DOR.ACC.REC.No.45/21.04.018/2021-22 dated August 30, 2021 
(Updated as on February 20, 2023). 

**4.	
f)	
Disclosure of transfer of loan exposures: Total amount**

**of loan not in default / stressed loans transferred and**

**acquired to / from other entities:**

In accordance with RBI circular no. DOR.STR.REC.51/21.04.048/ 

2021-22 dated September 24, 2021, the details of loans transferred/

acquired during the FY ended March 31, 2024 are given below:

**4.	
f)	
i)  Loans not in default transferred:**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**31.03.2024 - Current year
31.03.2023 - Previous Year**

NIL
NIL

**fjiksÉVx frfFk vFkkZr 31-03-2024 dks 
cdk;k jkf'k
ekud ds 
:i esa 
oxÊ—r**

**ekud iquxZfBr 
ds :i esa 
oxÊ—r**

**31.03.2024 - orZeku o"kZ
31.03.2023 - xr o"kZ**

**'kwU;
'kwU;**

----

**Loans not in default acquired through pool buyout via 
assignment:**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Current Period 
(01.04.2023 to 
31.03.2024)**

**Previous Period 
(01.04.2022 to 
31.03.2023)**

Amount of Loan
11732.99
5222.55

Weighted average maturity (in 
months)
69.57
57.94

Weighted average holding period 
(in months)
11.69
14.33

Retention of beneficial economic 
interest (by originator)
10.00%
10.00%

Tangible security coverage
150.07%
115.70%

Rating wise distribution of rated 
loans
NA
NA

**4. f)	 ii) Details of stressed Loans transferred during the  
	
	
 Year - loans classified as SMA:**

**Current Year (01.04.2023 to 31.03.2024)**

(All Amount in ₹ crore)
To 
ARCs
To permitted 
transferees
To other 
transferees

No. of accounts
NIL
NIL
NIL

Aggregate principal outstanding 
of loans transferred
NIL
NIL
NIL

Weighted average residual 
tenor of the loans transferred
NIL
NIL
NIL

Net book value of loans 
transferred (at the time of 
transfer)

NIL
NIL
NIL

Aggregate consideration
NIL
NIL
NIL

Additional consideration 
realized in respect of accounts 
transferred in earlier years

NIL
NIL
NIL

Quantum of excess Provision 
reversed to the Profit & Loss 
account on account of sale of 
stressed loans

NIL
NIL
NIL

**Previous Year (01.04.2022 to 31.03.2023)**

(All Amount in ₹ crore)
To 
ARCs
To 
permitted 
transferees

**To other 
transferees**

No. of accounts
NIL
NIL
NIL

Aggregate principal outstanding 
of loans transferred
NIL
NIL
NIL

Weighted average residual tenor 
of the loans transferred
NIL
NIL
NIL

Net book value of loans 
transferred (at the time of 
transfer)

NIL
NIL
NIL

Aggregate consideration
NIL
NIL
NIL

Additional consideration realized 
in respect of accounts transferred 
in earlier years

NIL
NIL
NIL

Quantum of excess Provision 
reversed to the Profit & Loss 
account on account of sale of 
stressed loans

NIL
NIL
NIL

**orZeku o"kZ 
¼01-04-2023 ls 
31-03-2024½**

xr o"kZ  
¼01-04-2022 ls 
31-03-2023½
_.k dh jkf'k
11732.99
5222.55

Hkkfjr vkSlr ifjiDork ¼eghuksa esa½
69.57
57.94

10.00%
10.00%

ewrZ çfrHkwfr dojst
150.07%
115.70%

**Js.kh—r _.kksa dk Js.kh okj forj.k
ykxw ugÈ
ykxw ugÈ**

**¼dqy jkf'k ` djksM+ esa½
,vkjlh 
dks
vuqer 
varfjfr;ksa 
ds fy,**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**xr o"kZ  ¼01-04-2022 ls 31-03-2023½**

**¼dqy jkf'k ` djksM+ esa½
,vkjlh 
dks
vuqer 
varfjfr;ksa 
ds fy,**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

----

**4. f) iii)  Details of stressed Loans acquired during the Year -  
	
	
loans classified as SMA:**

**Current Year (01.04.2023 to 31.03.2024)**

From 
ARCs

Aggregate principal 
outstanding of loans 
acquired

NIL
NIL

Aggregate consideration 
paid
NIL
NIL

Weighted average 
residual tenor of loans 
acquired

NIL
NIL

**Previous Year (01.04.2022 to 31.03.2023)**

From 
ARCs

Aggregate principal 
outstanding of loans 
acquired

NIL
NIL

Aggregate consideration 
paid
NIL
NIL

Weighted average 
residual tenor of loans 
acquired

NIL
NIL

**4. f) iv) 	 Details of stressed Loans transferred during the  
	
	
Year - loans classified as NPA:**

**31.03.2024 Current Year**

(All Amount in ₹ crore)
To ARCs
To permitted 
transferees
To other 
transferees 

No. of accounts
20
NIL
NIL

Aggregate principal 
outstanding of loans 
transferred

4928.70
NIL
NIL

Weighted average 
residual tenor of the 
loans transferred

NIL
NIL
NIL

Net book value of loans 
transferred (at the time 
of transfer)

NIL
NIL
NIL

Aggregate consideration
1247.66
NIL
NIL

Additional consideration 
realized in respect of 
accounts transferred in 
earlier years

46.99
NIL
NIL

Quantum of excess 
Provision reversed 
to the Profit & Loss 
account on account of 
sale of stressed loans

73.68
NIL
NIL

**orZeku o"kZ ¼01-04-2023 ls 31-03-2024½**

**,vkjlh 
ls**

**vÆtr _.kksa dk cdk;k 
dqy ewyèku
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**Hkqxrku fd;k x;k dqy 
çfrQy
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**xr o"kZ ¼01-04-2022 ls 31-03-2023½**

**,vkjlh 
ls**

**vÆtr _.kksa dk cdk;k 
dqy ewyèku
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**Hkqxrku fd;k x;k dqy 
çfrQy
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**¼dqy jkf'k ` djksM+ esa½
,vkjlh 
dks
vuqer 
varfjfr;ksa 
ds fy,**

4928.70
'kwU;
'kwU;

46.99
'kwU;
'kwU;

73.68
'kwU;
'kwU;

----

**31.03.2023 Previous Year**

(All Amount in ₹ crore)
To ARCs
To permitted 
transferees
To other 
transferees 

No. of accounts
7
NIL
NIL

Aggregate principal outstanding 
of loans transferred
1409.12
NIL
NIL

Weighted average residual 
tenor of the loans transferred
NIL
NIL
NIL

Net book value of loans 
transferred (at the time of 
transfer)

32.20
NIL
NIL

Aggregate consideration
617.71
NIL
NIL

Additional consideration 
realized in respect of accounts 
transferred in earlier years

95.62
NIL
NIL

Quantum of excess Provision 
reversed to the Profit & Loss 
account on account of sale of 
stressed loans

585.51
NIL
NIL

**4. f) v)	 Details of stressed Loans acquired during the Year - 
	
	
loans classified as NPA:**

**31.03.2024 Current Year**

**From 
ARCs**

Aggregate principal 
outstanding of loans acquired
NIL
NIL

Aggregate consideration paid
NIL
NIL

Weighted average residual 
tenor of loans acquired
NIL
NIL

**31.03.2023 Previous Year**

**From 
ARCs**

Aggregate principal 
outstanding of loans acquired
NIL
NIL

Aggregate consideration paid
NIL
NIL

Weighted average residual 
tenor of loans acquired
NIL
NIL

**4. f) vi) 	 Distribution of the SRs held across the various 
categories of Recovery Ratings assigned to such SRs 
by the credit rating agencies as on March 31, 2024:**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Recovery Rating Band
Book Value 
31.03.2024
Book Value 
31.03.2023**

RR1+
11.72
28.72

RR1
212.06
262.86

RR2
62.78
94.68

RR3
60.63
136.49

RR4
0.00
443.44

RR5
437.85
389.93

Rating Withdrawn
502.94
162.07

Total
1287.98
1518.19

+As per RBI guidelines post 8 years Rating is not applicable.

**31-03-2023 xr o"kZ**

**¼dqy jkf'k ` djksM+ esa½
,vkjlh 
dks
vuqer 
varfjfr;ksa 
ds fy,**

1409.12
'kwU;
'kwU;

**gLrkarfjr _.kksa dk fuoy 
cgh ewY; ¼gLrkarj.k ds le;½**

32.20
'kwU;
'kwU;

95.62
'kwU;
'kwU;

585.51
'kwU;
'kwU;

**,vkjlh 
ls**

**vÆtr _.kksa dk cdk;k dqy 
ewyèku
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**31-03-2023 xr o"kZ**

**,vkjlh 
ls**

**vÆtr _.kksa dk cdk;k dqy 
ewyèku
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**¼jkf'k ₹ djksM+ esa½**

----

**4. f) vii)	 Investments in Security Receipts (SRs):**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

Current Year   
(As on 31.03.2024)
Previous  Year  
(As on 31.03.2023) 

Particulars
SRs 
issued 
within 
past  
5 years

SRs 
issued 
more 
than  
5 years 
ago but 
within 
past  
8 years

SRs 
issued 
more 
than  
8 years 
ago

SRs 
issued 
within 
past  
5 years

SRs 
issued 
more 
than  
5 years 
ago but 
within 
past  
8 years

SRs 
issued 
more 
than  
8 years 
ago

a)
Book value of 
SRs where NPAs 
sold by the bank 
are the underlying

0.34
788.76
498.88
87.99
1291.51
138.69

Provision held 
against (a)
0.34
788.76
498.88
87.99
1291.51
138.69

b)
Book value of 
SRs where NPAs 
sold by other 
banks/ financial 
institutions/ non-
banking financial 
companies are 
the underlying

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Provision held 
against (b)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Total (a) + (b)
0.34
788.76
498.88
87.99
1291.51
138.69

**4.	
g) 	 Fraud accounts**

**Current 
Year
Previous 
Year**

Number of frauds 
reported
Borrowal
52
164

Non Borrowal
79
125

Digital Fraud
6981
00

**TOTAL
7112
289**

Amount involved in 
fraud (₹ crore)
Borrowal*
1752.91
1580.46

Non Borrowal
31.25
228.64

Digital Fraud
19.43
0.00

**TOTAL
1803.59
1809.10**

Amount of provision 
made for such frauds 
(₹ crore)

Borrowal
1425.70
1578.46

Non Borrowal
16.97
224.22

Digital Fraud
0.00
0.00

**TOTAL
1442.67
1802.68**

Amount of Un-
amortised provision 
debited from ‘other 
reserves’ as at the end 
of the year. (₹ crore)

-
-
-

* Amount outstanding as on 31.03.2024 the Borrowal Fraud is Rs. 1425.70 
crore.

**5 ls 
vfèkd 
o"kZ igys 
tkjh 
fd, x, 
,lvkj 
ysfdu 
fiNys 8 
o"kks± ds 
Hkhrj**

**8 ls 
vfèkd 
o"kZ 
igys 
tkjh 
fd, 
x, 
,lvkj**

**fiNys 
5 o"kks± 
ds 
Hkhrj 
tkjh 
fd, 
x, 
,lvkj**

**5 ls 
vfèkd 
o"kZ igys 
tkjh 
fd, x, 
,lvkj 
ysfdu 
fiNys  
8 o"kks± 
ds Hkhrj**

**8 ls 
vfèkd 
o"kZ 
igys 
tkjh 
fd, 
x, 
,lvkj**

0.34
788.76
498.88
87.99
1291.51
138.69

**¼,½ ds çfr fd;k 
x;k çkoèkku**

0.34
788.76
498.88
87.99
1291.51
138.69

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

**¼ch½ ds çfr fd;k 
x;k çkoèkku**

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

dqy ¼,½$¼ch½
0.34
788.76
498.88
87.99
1291.51
138.69

**4- th½  èkks[kkèkM+h [kkrs**

xSj mèkkj
79
125

fMftVy èkks[kkèkM+h
6981
00

**dqy
7112
289**

èkks[kkèkM+h esa 'kkfey 
jkf'k ¼₹ djksM+½
mèkkj*
1752.91
1580.46

xSj mèkkj
31.25
228.64

fMftVy èkks[kkèkM+h
19.43
0.00

**dqy
1803.59
1809.10**

,slh èkks[kkèkM+h ds fy, 
fd, x, çkoèkku dh 
jkf'k ¼₹ djksM+½

mèkkj
1425.70
1578.46

xSj mèkkj
16.97
224.22

fMftVy èkks[kkèkM+h
0.00
0.00

**dqy
1442.67
1802.68**

-
-
-

*m/kkj /kks[kk?kM+h dh 31-03-2024 rd cdk;k jkf'k 1425-70 djksM+ #i;s gSA

----

**4.	
h)	 i)	
In accordance with RBI circular no. DBR.**

**No.BP.BC.18/21.04.048/2018-19 dated January**

**01, 
2019, 
DOR.No.BP.BC.34/21.4.048/2019-**

**20 dated February 11, 2020 and DOR.No.BP.**

**BC/4/21.04.048/2020-21  dated August 06, 2020 on**

**“Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME)**

**sector – Restructuring of Advances”, the detail of**

**MSME restructured accounts is as under:**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**No. of Accounts Restructured
Amount
Provision held**

4853
545.79
49.24

4.	
h)	 ii)	
In accordance with RBI circular no. DOR.STR.
REC.12/21.04.048/2021-22 dated May 05, 2021 
on “Resolution Framework 2.0 - Resolution 
of Covid-19 related stress of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)” the details of 
accounts restructured is as under: 

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**No. of Accounts Restructured
Amount
Provision held**

24995
2147.98
268.49

**4.	
h)	 iii)	 Details of resolution plan implemented under 
Resolution Framework for COVID 19 related 
stress as per RBI Circular RBI/2020-21/16 DOR. 
No.BP.BC/3/21.04.048/2020-21 
dated 
August 
06, 
2020 
and 
RBI/2021-22/31 
DOR.STR.
REC.11/21.04.048/2021-22 dated May 5, 2021 are 
given below:**

**iquxZfBr [kkrksa dh la[;k
jkf'k
fd;k x;k çkoèkku**

4853
545.79
49.24

**iquxZfBr [kkrksa dh la[;k
jkf'k
fd;k x;k çkoèkku**

24995
2147.98
268.49

----

¼jkf'k ₹ djksM+ esa½

**¼,½ dk] dqy _.k 
tks Nekgh ds nkSjku 
,uih, esa pyk x;k**

**¼,½ dk] Nekgh ds 
nkSjku cês [kkrs esa 
Mkyh xÃ jkf'k**

**¼,½ dk] Nekgh ds 
nkSjku mèkkjdrkZvksa 
}kjk Hkqxrku dh 
xÃ jkf'k**

d‚iksZjsV O;fä*
2196.49
0.00
0.00
555.33
1863.20

*ftuesa ls ,e,l,eÃ
313.93
0.00
0.00
107.59
214.34

vU; 
2.68
0.00
0.00
0.26
3.93

dqy vksVhvkj 1-0
2641.05
12.62
0.00
601.54
2320.99

O;fäxr _.k
4041.84
157.15
0.00
417.58
3660.87

dkjksckj _.k
130.24
5.92
0.00
22.72
128.21

NksVk dkjksckj
564.79
36.96
0.00
76.88
490.14

dqy vksVhvkj 2-0
4736.87
200.03
0.00
517.18
4279.22

dqy ;ksx
7377.92
212.65
0.00
1118.72
6600.21

**5-	 ,DlikstlZ**

vU; vkoklh; caèkd
126933.66
69493.35

**dqy
154179.53
97984.72**

xSj fufèk vkèkkfjr
714.15
626.41

**dqy
23433.61
16305.69**

i.   vkoklh;
0.00
0.00

ii.  okf.kfT;d LFkkoj laink
0.00
0.00

42808.75
45887.15

cSad }kjk vkokl dE‍ifu;ksa ,oa d‚iksZjs'ku esa fd;k x;k fuos'k
5357.81
6251.82

**dqy
48166.56
52138.97**

**LFkkoj laink {ks= dks dqy ,Dlikst+j
225779.70
166429.38**

----

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

Type of borrower 
Exposure to accounts 
classified as Standard 
consequent to implementation 
of  resolution plan - Position 
as at 30.09.2023 (A) 

Of (A), aggregate 
debt that slipped 
into NPA during 
the half-year 

Of (A) amount 
written off during 
the half-year 

Of (A) amount 
paid by the 
borrowers during 
the half year 

Exposure to accounts 
classified as Standard 
consequent to implementation 
of resolution plan - Position as 
at 31.03.2024  

Personal Loans 
441.88
12.62
0.00
45.95
453.86

Corporate persons*
2196.49
0.00
0.00
555.33
1863.20

* Of which MSMEs 
313.93
0.00
0.00
107.59
214.34

Others 
2.68
0.00
0.00
0.26
3.93

**Total OTR 1.0
2641.05
12.62
0.00
601.54
2320.99**

Personal Loans
4041.84
157.15
0.00
417.58
3660.87

Business Loans
130.24
5.92
0.00
22.72
128.21

Small Business
564.79
36.96
0.00
76.88
490.14

**Total OTR 2.0
4736.87
200.03
0.00
517.18
4279.22**

**Grand Total
7377.92
212.65
0.00
1118.72
6600.21**

There are 249 borrower accounts having aggregate exposure of Rs.17.81 Crore to the Bank where resolution plans had been implemented and now modified 
under RBI’s resolution framework 2.0 dated May 5, 2021.

**5. 	 Exposures**

**5. 	 a) 	 Exposure to real estate sector**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Category
Current Year
Previous Year**

**i)
Direct Exposure**

**a)
Residential Mortgages–**

**Lending fully secured by mortgages on residential property that is or will be occupied 
by the borrower or that is rented.**

**Housing loans classified as priority sector 
27245.87
28491.37**

**Others Residential Mortgages
126933.66
69493.35**

**Total
154179.53
97984.72**

**b)
Commercial Real Estate–**

**Lending secured by mortgages on commercial real estate (office buildings, retail 
space, multipurpose commercial premises, industrial or warehouse space, land 
acquisition, development and construction, etc.).;**

**Fund Based
22719.46
15679.28**

**Non Fund Based
714.15
626.41**

**Total
23433.61
16305.69**

**c)
Investments in Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS) and other securitized exposures–**

**i.   Residential
0.00
0.00**

**ii.  Commercial Real Estate
0.00
0.00**

**ii)
Indirect Exposure**

**Fund based and non-fund-based exposures to National Housing Bank (NHB) and 
Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) including Foreign Offices.
42808.75
45887.15**

**Investments made by the Bank in Housing Companies and Corporations
5357.81
6251.82**

**Total
48166.56
52138.97**

**Total Exposure to Real Estate Sector
225779.70
166429.38**

----

2297.05
2634.50 

0.62
0.66

NIL
NIL

204.88
432.84

25.40
25.00

**'kwU;
'kwU;**

iwath cktkj dks dqy ,D‍likst+j
2834.25
3752.37

**5- lh½ 	tksf[ke Js.khokj&ns'k lEcUèkh ,Dlikst+j**

**31-03-2023 dks èkkfjr 
çkoèkku ¼xr o"kZ½**

----

**5.	
b)	 Exposure to capital market**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

i)
Direct investment in equity shares, convertible bonds, convertible debentures and 
units of equity oriented mutual funds the corpus of which is not exclusively invested in 
corporate debt.

2297.05
2634.50 

ii)
Advances against shares / bonds / debentures or other securities or on clean basis 
to individuals for investment in shares (including IPOs / ESOPs), convertible bonds, 
convertible debentures, and units of equity oriented mutual funds;

0.62
0.66

iii)
Advances for any other purposes where shares or convertible bonds or convertible 
debentures or units of equity oriented mutual funds are taken as primary security;
NIL
NIL

iv)
Advances for any other purposes to the extent secured by the collateral security of 
shares or convertible bonds or convertible debentures or units of equity oriented 
mutual funds i.e. where the primary security other than shares / convertible bonds / 
convertible debentures / units of equity oriented mutual funds does not fully cover the 
advances;

204.88
432.84

v)
Secured and unsecured advances to stockbrokers and guarantees issued on behalf of 
stock brokers and market makers;
25.40
25.00

vi)
Loans sanctioned to corporates against the security of shares / bonds / debentures or 
other securities or on clean basis for meeting promoter’s contribution to the equity of 
new companies in anticipation of raising resources;

NIL
NIL

vii)
Bridge loans to companies against expected equity flows /issues;
NIL
NIL

viii)
Underwriting commitments taken up by the banks in respect of primary issue of shares 
or convertible bonds or convertible debentures or units of equity oriented mutual funds;
NIL
NIL

ix)
Financing to stockbrokers for margin trading;
NIL
NIL

x)
All exposures to Venture Capital Funds (both registered and unregistered)
306.30 
659.37

**Total exposure to capital market
2834.25
3752.37**

**5.	
c)	
Risk category-wise country exposure**

Total Net Funded Exposure as on 31.03.2024 is ₹38,157.97 Crores. Total assets of the Bank as on 31.12.2023 were ₹15,23,992.00 Crores, 
1% of total asset is ₹15,239.92 Crore. Bank exposure to any country is not beyond 1% of Total Assets of the Bank as on 31.12.2023. Hence, 
no provision is required with respect to country risk exposure as on 31.03.2024.

(Previous year: Total Net Funded Exposure as on 31.03.2023 is ₹52,827.59 Crores. Total assets of the Bank as on 31.12.2022 were 
₹14,01,797 Crores, 1% of total asset is ₹14,017.97 Crore. Bank exceeded the exposure to USA beyond ₹14,017.97 Crores i.e. 1% of Total 
Assets of the Bank as on 31.12.2022. Hence, provision of ₹11.82 Crores is required with respect to country risk exposure as on 31.03.2023.

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Risk Category
ECGC 
Rating
Funded Exposure 
(net) as on 31.03.2024
(Current Year)**

**Provision held as on 
31.03.2024
(Current Year)**

**Funded Exposure 
(net) as on 31.03.2023
(Previous Year)**

**Provision held as on 
31.03.2023
(Previous Year)**

Insignificant
A1
20274.91
0.00
30344.40
11.82

Low
A2
17264.01
0.00
21812.89
0.00

Moderately Low
B1
473.01
0.00 
275.02
0.00 

Moderate
B2
11.02
0.00 
394.25
0.00 

Moderately High
C1
130.97
0.00 
0.62
 0.00 

High
C2
0.42
 0.00 
0.41
0.00 

Very High
D
3.63 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

**Total
38157.97
0.00
52827.59
11.82**

----

**5.	
d)	 Unsecured advances**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

Total Unsecured Advances of 
the Bank
214017.01
151035.55

Out of the above, amount of 
advances for which intangible 
securities such as charge 
over the rights, licenses, 
authority, etc. have been 
taken

0.00
6218.08

Estimated 
value 
of 
such 
intangible securities
0.00
11002.90

**5.	
e)	
Factoring exposures**

**Factoring exposures (Under TReDS)**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Balance Outstanding 
Current Year
Balance Outstanding 
Previous Year**

981.19
827.88

**5.	
f)	
Intra-group exposures**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

Sl.No.
Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year

i)
Total amount of intra-
group exposures
6974.66
8193.42

ii)
Total amount of top 20 
intra-group exposures
6974.66
8193.42

iii)
Percentage 
of 
intra-
group exposures to total 
exposure of the Bank on 
borrower/customers

0.54%
0.71%

iv)
Details of breach of limits 
on intra-group exposures 
and regulatory action, if 
any

NA
NA

**5.	
g)	 Unhedged foreign currency exposure**

The Bank has framed a policy to manage Currency Induced Credit 
Risk and has been incorporated in Bank’s Credit Management & 
Risk Policy 2023-24 as follows:

 In terms of RBI guidelines, the Bank has framed a policy to manage 
currency induced credit risk and has incorporated the same in 
bank’s current Credit Management & Risk Policy as follows:

“In terms of RBI guidelines, Bank monitors the currency wise 
Unhedged Foreign Currency Exposure in the books of borrowers at 
quarter ends along-with the Annualized Earnings before Interest & 

**fooj.k
orZeku o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

cSad ds dqy vçfrHkwr vfxze
214017.01
151035.55

0.00
6218.08

**,slh vewrZ çfrHkwfr;ksa dk 
vuqekfur ewY;**

0.00
11002.90

**5-	 Ã½  QSDVÇjx ,Dlikst+j**

**orZeku o"kZ esa cdk;k 'ks"k
xr o"kZ esa cdk;k 'ks"k**

981.19
827.88

6974.66
8193.42

ii)
'kh"kZ 20 baVªk&xzqi ,Dlikst+j 
dh dqy jkf'k

6974.66
8193.42

iii)
mèkkjdrkZ@xzkgdksa ij cSad 
ds dqy ,Dlikst+j ds fy, 
baVªk&xzqi ,Dlikst+j dk 
çfr'kr

0.54%
0.71%

**ykxw ugÈ
ykxw ugÈ**

**5-	 th½  vjf{kr fons'kh eqæk ,Dlikst+j**

----

Depreciation (EBID). The incremental provision (ranging from 0 to 
80 bps on total credit exposure, over and above the standard asset 
provisioning) and capital requirement will depend on likely loss 
(due to foreign currency fluctuation), that borrowers may face due 
to their un-hedged forex exposure in their books. Bank maintains 
separate charge and provisioning requirement on account of such 
exposures which may impact the cost to the borrowers. Appropriate 
disclosures in the financial statements of the Bank shall also be 
made.”

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Particulars
Current Year 
31.03.2024
Previous Year 
31.03.2023**

Incremental Provision 
(Domestic)
132.22
127.42

Incremental Provision 
(Overseas)
0.83
4.93

Total incremental Provision
133.05
132.35

Risk Weighted Assets (RWA)
809.34
949.47

Incremental Capital held 
RWA (@11.50%)
93.07
109.19

The Bank has estimated the liability for Unhedged Foreign Currency 
Exposure in terms of RBI Circular RBI/2022-23/131 DOR.MRG.
REC.76/00-00-007/2022-23 dated October 11, 2022 and is holding 
a provision of ₹133.05 Crores as on 31.03.2024 (previous year ₹ 
132.35 Crores).

6. 	 Concentration of deposits, advances, exposures and NPAs

**6.	
a)	
Concentration of deposits**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

Total deposits of the twenty 
largest depositors
53012.40
59620.75

Percentage of deposits of 
twenty largest depositors to 
total deposits of the Bank

4.07%
4.86%

Note: The above deposit figures do not include Inter Bank deposit held by 
Bank.

**6.	
b)	 Concentration of advances**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

Total advances to the twenty 
largest borrowers
177171.32
153698.47

Percentage of advances to 
twenty largest borrowers to 
total advances of the Bank

18.02%
17.37%

**fooj.k
orZeku o"kZ 
31-03-2024
xr o"kZ  
31-03-2023**

o`f)'khy çkoèkku ¼?kjsyw½
132.22
127.42

o`f)'khy çkoèkku ¼fons'kh½
0.83
4.93

dqy o`f)'khy çkoèkku
133.05
132.35

**tksf[ke Hkkfjr vkfLr;ka 
¼vkjMCY;w,½**

809.34
949.47

o`f)'khy iwath èkkfjr vkjMCY;w, 
(@11.50%)

93.07
109.19

**6-	 tekjkf'k;ksa] vfxzeksa] ,Dlikstjksa vkSj ,uih, dk ladsaæ.k**

**fooj.k
orZeku o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

**chl lcls cM+s tekdrkZvksa dh 
dqy tek jkf'k**

53012.40
59620.75

**cSad dh dqy tekjkf'k;ksa esa 
chl lcls cM+s tekdrkZvksa dh 
tekjkf'k;ksa dk çfr'kr**

4.07%
4.86%

177171.32
153698.47

**cSad dh dqy tekjkf'k;ksa esa 
chl lcls cM+s tekdrkZvksa dh 
tekjkf'k;ksa dk çfr'kr**

18.02%
17.37%

----

**6.	
c)	
Concentration of exposures**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

Total exposure to the twenty 
largest borrowers/customers
222717.18
194823.45

Percentage of exposures to 
the twenty largest borrowers/ 
customers 
to 
the 
total 
exposure of the Bank on 
borrowers/customers

17.36%
16.87%

**6.	
d)	 Concentration of NPAs**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

Total Exposure to the top 
twenty NPA accounts
5378.09
14311.77

Percentage 
of 
exposures 
to the twenty largest NPA 
exposure to total Gross NPAs.

9.55%
18.51%

**7. 	 Derivatives**

**7. 	 a)	
Interest rate swap**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Particulars
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year**

i)
The notional principal of 
swap agreements
25.00
745.00

ii)
Losses 
which 
would 
be 
incurred 
if 
counterparties 
failed to fulfil their obligations 
under the agreements

0.00
0.23

iii)
Collateral required by the 
Bank upon entering into 
swaps

NIL
NIL

iv)
Concentration of credit risk 
arising from the swaps$
NIL
NIL

v)
The fair value of the swap 
book@
-0.1757
-2.5804

Note: Nature and terms of swaps including information on credit and market 
risk and the accounting policies adopted for recording the swaps should also 
be disclosed. 
$Examples of concentration could be exposures to particular industries or 
swaps with highly geared companies.
@All these swaps deals are Trading swap and the fair value is its mark to 
market value.
“The above Trades are Interest rate Swap Deal done with Interbank for 
₹25.00Crores (previous year ₹745.00Crores) and with Financial Institution ₹ 
NIL (previous year ₹NIL).

“There is only one deal where payment is made at floating rate and 
received at Fixed Contract rate”.

**fooj.k
orZeku o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

**chl lcls cM+s mèkkjdrkZvksa@
xzkgdksa dks dqy ,Dlikst+j**

222717.18
194823.45

17.36%
16.87%

**fooj.k
orZeku o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

**'kh"kZ chl ,uih, [kkrksa esa dqy 
,Dlikst+j**

5378.09
14311.77

**dqy ldy ,uih, esa chl 
lcls cM+s ,uih, ,Dlikst+j ds 
,Dlikst+j dk çfr'krA**

9.55%
18.51%

**7-	 O;qRiUu**

fooj.k
orZeku o"kZ
xr o"kZ
i)
vnykcnyh djkjksa dk dfYir 
fl)kar

25.00
745.00

0.00
0.23

iii) vnykcnyh esa 'kkfey gksus ij 
cSadksa }kjk visf{kr laikÆÜod 
çfrHkwfr

NIL
NIL

iv) vnykcnyh ds dkj.k mRiUu 
_.k tksf[ke$

NIL
NIL

v)
vnykcnyh cgh dk mfpr 
ewY;@

-0.1757
-2.5804

$ ladsUæ.k ds mnkgj.k fo'ks"k m|ksxksa esa ,Dlikst+j ;k mPp {kerk okyh daifu;ksa ds 
lkFk vnyk&cnyh gks ldrs gSaA

----

**7.	
b)	 Exchange traded interest rate derivatives**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**S.No.
Particulars
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year**

i)
Notional 
principal 
amount 
of 
exchange traded interest rate 
derivatives undertaken during the 
Year (instrument wise)

a)  Interest Rate Futures
NIL
NIL

ii)
Notional 
principal 
amount 
of 
exchange traded interest rate 
derivatives outstanding as on 31st 
March 2024 (instrument wise)

a)  Interest Rate Futures
NIL
NIL

iii)
Notional 
principal 
amount 
of 
exchange traded interest rate 
derivatives outstanding and not 
‘highly effective’ (instrument wise)

NIL
NIL

iv)
Mark to market value of exchange 
traded interest rate derivatives 
outstanding 
and 
not 
‘highly 
effective’ (instrument wise)

NIL
NIL

**7.	
c)	
Disclosures on risk exposure in derivatives**

**7.	
c)	
i)   Qualitative disclosures**

The Bank uses derivatives products for hedging its own balance 
sheet items as well as for trading purposes. The risk management 
of derivative operation is headed by a senior executive, who reports 
to top management, independent of the line functions. Trading 
positions are marked to market on daily basis.

The derivative policy is framed by Integrated Risk Management 
Division, which includes measurement of credit risk and market risk.

The hedge transactions are undertaken for balance sheet 
management. Proper system for reporting and monitoring of risks 
are in place. Policy for hedging and processes for monitoring the 
same is in place.

Accounting policy for recording hedge and non-hedge transactions 
are in place, which includes recognition of income, premiums and 
discounts.

Valuation of outstanding contracts, provisioning, collateral and 
credit risk mitigation are being done.

**Ø-la-
fooj.k
orZeku 
o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

**,½  C;kt nj ok;nk
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**,½  C;kt nj ok;nk
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**'kwU;
'kwU;**

**'kwU;
'kwU;**

**7-	 lh½	O;qRiUuh esa tksf[ke ,Dlikst+j ij çdVhdj.k**

**7-	 lh½	i½ xq.kkRed çdVhdj.k**

----

**7.	
c)	
ii)   Quantitative disclosures**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Sr. 
No
Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

**Currency 
Derivatives**

**Interest rate 
Derivatives**

**Currency 
Derivatives**

**Interest rate 
derivatives 
Currency**

a)
Derivatives (Notional Principal Amount)

i) For hedging
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

ii) For trading
0.00
25.00
0.00
745.00

b)
Marked to Market Positions

Hedging

i) Asset (+)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

ii) Liability (-)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Trading

i) Asset (+)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

ii) Liability (-)
0.00
-0.1757
0.00
-2.5804

c)
Credit Exposure [1]
0.00
0.1250
0.00
4.0817

d)
Likely impact of one percentage change in interest rate 
(100*PV01)

i) on hedging derivatives
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

ii) on trading derivatives
0.00
0.07
0.00
2.13

e)
Maximum and Minimum of 100* PV01 observed during the year

i) on hedging
maximum
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

minimum
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

ii) on trading
maximum
0.00
0.16
0.00
3.94

minimum
0.00
0.07
0.00
2.13

1Banks adopt the Current Exposure Method on Measurement of Credit 
Exposure of Derivative Products as per Reserve Bank of India instructions.

**7.	
d)	 Credit default swaps**

**Since the Bank is not using any proprietary pricing model for pricing 
Credit default swaps contracts, and it is over the counter contract 
(OTC), the price is determined by the market dynamics.**

**As such no disclosure is to be made in terms of extant RBI 
guidelines for Current & Previous year.**

**Ø- 
la-
fooj.k
orZeku o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

**eqæk O;qRiUuh**

**C;kt nj 
O;qRiUuh**

**eqæk O;qRiUuh**

**C;kt nj 
O;qRiUuh**

i) cpko&O;oLFkk ds fy,
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

ii) dkjksckj ds fy,
0.00
25.00
0.00
745.00

**ch½
cktkj dh fLFkfr ds fy, 
fpfàr**

**cpko&O;oLFkk**

i) vkfLr (+)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

ii) ns;rk (-)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

**dkjksckj**

i) vkfLr (+)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

ii) ns;rk (-)
0.00
-0.1757
0.00
-2.5804

lh½ _.k ,Dlikst+j [1]
0.00
0.1250
0.00
4.0817

i) gsÇtx MsfjosfVOl ij
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

ii) dkjksckj MsfjosfVOl ij
0.00
0.07
0.00
2.13

i) cpko&O;oLFkk 
ij
vfèkdre
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

U;wure
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

ii) dkjksckj ij	
vfèkdre
vfèkdre
0.00
0.16
0.00
3.94

U;wure
0.00
0.07
0.00
2.13

**7-	 Mh½	_.k pwd vnyk&cnyh**

----

**8.	
Disclosures relating to securitization**

**(Numbers / Amount in ₹ crore)**

**Sr. 
No
Particulars
Simple, 
Transparent and 
Comparable 
(STC)**

**Non-STC 
transactions**

**31.03.2024**

**31.03.2023**

**31.03.2024**

**31.03.2023**

1.
No of SPEs holding assets for 
securitization transactions originated 
by the originator

(only the SPVs relating to outstanding 
securitization exposures to be 
reported here)

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

2.
Total amount of securitized assets as 
per books of the SPEs
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

3.
Total amount of exposures retained by 
the originator to comply with MRR as 
on the date of balance sheet

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

a)	 Off-balance sheet exposures

•	
First loss

•	
Others

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

b)	 On-balance sheet exposures

•	
First loss

•	
Others

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

4.
Amount of exposures to securitization 
transactions other than MRR
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

a)	 Off-balance sheet exposures

i)	
Exposure to own securitizations

	
•	
First loss

	
•	
Others

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

ii)	 Exposure to third party  
       securitizations

	
•	
First loss

	
•	
Others

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

b)	 On-balance sheet exposures

i)	
Exposure to own securitizations

	
•	
First loss

	
•	
Others

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

ii)	 Exposure to third party  
       securitizations

	
•	
First loss

	
•	
Others

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

5.
Sale consideration received for the 
securitized assets and gain/loss on 
sale on account of securitization.

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

6.
Form and quantum (outstanding 
value) of services provided by way of 
liquidity support, post-securitization 
asset servicing, etc.

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

7.
Performance of facility provided, 
please provide separately for each 
facility viz. Credit enhancement, 
liquidity support, servicing agent etc. 
Mention percent in bracket as of total 
value of facility provided.

(a) Amount paid

(b) Repayment received

(c) Outstanding amount

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

**Ø- 
la-
fooj.k
ljy] 
ikjn'kÊ 
,oa rqyuh; 
¼,lVhlh½**

**xSj& 
,lVhlh 
ysunsu**

**31.03.2024**

**31.03.2023**

**31.03.2024**

**31.03.2023**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

3.
rqyu i= dh rkjh[k dks ,evkjvkj dk 
vuqikyu djus ds fy, çorZd }kjk j[ks 
x, ,Dlikst+j dh dqy jkf'k

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**,½	 rqyu&i= esa u vkus okys ,Dlikst+j
i)	 Lo& çfrHkwfrdj.k ds fy, ,Dlikst+j 
	
•	 çFke gkfu**

**•	 vU;**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**ii)	 r`rh; i{k ds çfrHkwfrdj.k ds fy, 
,Dlikst+j**

**•	 çFke gkfu**

**•	 vU;**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**i)	 Lo& çfrHkwfrdj.k ds fy, ,Dlikst+j 
	
•	 çFke gkfu**

**•	 vU;**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**ii)	 r`rh; i{k ds çfrHkwfrdj.k ds fy, 
,Dlikst+j**

**•	 çFke gkfu**

**•	 vU;**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

----

8.
Average default rate of portfolios 
observed in the past. Please provide 
breakup separately for each asset 
class i.e. RMBS, Vehicle Loans etc.

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

9.
Amount and number of additional/
top up loan given on same underlying 
asset. Please provide breakup 
separately for each asset class i.e. 
RMBS, Vehicle Loans etc.

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

10.
Investor complaints

(a) Directly / Indirectly received and

(b) Complaints out standing

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

**9.	
Off balance sheet SPVs sponsored (which are required to**

**be consolidated as per accounting norms)**

**Name of the SPV sponsored**

**Current Year
Previous Year**

**Domestic
Overseas
Domestic
Overseas**

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

**10.	 Transfers to Depositor Education and Awareness Fund 
	
(DEA Fund)**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Sr.No.
Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

i)
Opening balance of amounts 
transferred to DEA Fund
5345.97
5069.32

ii)
Add: Amounts transferred to 
DEA Fund during the Year
452.84
370.09

iii)
Less: Amounts reimbursed 
by DEA Fund towards claims 
during the Year

328.26
93.44

iv)
Closing balance of amounts 
transferred to DEA Fund
5470.55
5345.97

**** The amount will be reflected as Contingent Liabilities – Others, 
items for which the Bank is contingently liable under Schedule 12 
of the financial statement as on 31.03.2024**

**11.	 Disclosure of complaints**

**a)	
Summary Information on Complaints received by 
the bank from customers and from the Offices of 
Ombudsman, including ATM complaints**

Sr. 
No.
Particulars
Current Year 
(FY ended 
31.03.2024)

#Previous 
Year (FY 
ended 
31.03.2023)

Complaints received by the Bank from its customers

1.
Number of complaints pending 
at beginning of the year
23185
30602

2.
Number of complaints received 
during the year
1130195
1355037

3.
Number of complaints  disposed 
during the year
1121029
1362454

3.1
Of which, number of complaints 
rejected by the Bank
618884
425357

4.
Number of complaints pending 
at the end of the year
32351
23185

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;
'kwU;**

**9-	 rqyu&i= esa u vkus okys çk;ksftr ,lihoh ¼ftUgsa ys[kkadu  
	
ekunaMksa ds vuqlkj lesfdr fd;k tkuk vko';d gS½**

5345.97
5069.32

ii)
tksM+% o"kZ ds nkSjku MhÃ, dks"k 
esa varfjr jkf'k

452.84
370.09

328.26
93.44

iv)
MhÃ, QaM esa varfjr jkf'k;ksa 
dk vafre 'ks"k

5470.55
5345.97

**dk;kZy;ksa ls çkIr f'kdk;rksa ij laf{kIr tkudkjh**

1.
o"kZ dh 'kq#vkr esa yafcr 
f'kdk;rksa dh la[;k	

23185
30602

2.
o"kZ ds nkSjku çkIr f'kdk;rksa 
dh la[;k

1130195
1355037

3.
o"kZ ds nkSjku fuLrkfjr 
f'kdk;rksa dh la[;k

1121029
1362454

3.1
ftuesa ls] cSad }kjk fujLr 
dh xÃ f'kdk;rksa dh la[;k

618884
425357

4.
o"kZ ds var esa yafcr 
f'kdk;rksa dh la[;k

32351
23185

----

**Maintainable complaints received by the Bank from  
Office of Ombudsman**

**Sr. 
No.
Particulars
Current Year  
(FY ended 
31.03.2024)**

**#Previous 
Year  
(FY ended 
31.03.2023)**

5.
Number 
of 
maintainable 
complaints 
received 
by 
the 
Banks 
from 
Office 
of 
Ombudsman

10188
9384

5.1
Of 5, number of complaints 
resolved in favour of the Bank 
by Office of  Ombudsman

3749
3340

5.2
Of 5, number of complaints 
resolved through conciliation/
mediation/advisories issued by 
Office of  Ombudsman

6438
6042

5.3
Of 5, number of complaints 
resolved after passing of Awards 
by Office of  Ombudsman 
against the Bank

1
2

6.
Number 
of 
Awards 
unimplemented 
within 
the 
stipulated time (other than 
those appealed)

0
0

**Note: 
1. 	Maintainable complaints refer to complaints on the grounds specifically 
mentioned in Integrated Ombudsman Scheme, 2021 (Previously Banking 
Ombudsman Scheme, 2006) and covered within the ambit of the Scheme.
2. 	Complaints data consist of both portals i.e. CGRMS & CRM Portal of the 
Bank.
# 	 Data regarding number of complaints includes all type of complaints.**

**b)	 Top five grounds* of complaints received by the Bank**

**from customers**

Grounds of complaints,  
(i.e. complaints relating to)

Number of complaints pending 
at the beginning of the year

Number of complaints received 
during the Year

% Increase/ decrease in the 
number of complaints received 
over the Previous year

Number of complaints pending 
at the end of the Year

Of 5, number of complaints 
pending beyond 30 days

1
2
3
4
5
6

Current Year

Internet/Mobile/
Electronic Banking
13442
489664
-35.08
12262
457

ATM/Debit Cards
1814
316892
-13.89
5054
38

Account opening/ 
difficulty in operation 
of accounts

303
21582
-38.29
458
10

Pension and facilities 
for senior citizens/ 
differently abled

106
14532
107.54
225
9

Loans and advances
128
8594
37.07
332
14

Others
7392
278931
51.16
14020
1673

Total
23185
1130195
-16.59
32351
2201

5.
cSad dks yksdiky ds dk;kZy; 
ls çkIr vuqj{k.kh; f'kdk;rksa 
dh la[;k

10188
9384

5.1
5 esa ls] yksdiky dk;kZy;  
}kjk cSad ds i{k esa fuiVkÃ 
xÃ f'kdk;rksa dh la[;k

3749
3340

6438
6042

1
2

0
0

# 	 f'kdk;rksa dh la[;k ds vkadM+ksa esa lHkh çdkj dh f'kdk;rsa 'kkfey gSaA

**o"kZ dh 'kq#vkr esa yafcr 
f'kdk;rksa dh la[;k**

**o"kZ ds nkSjku çkIr f'kdk;rksa 
dh la[;k**

**fiNys o"kZ dh rqyuk esa çkIr 
f'kdk;rksa dh la[;k esa % 
o`f)@deh**

**o"kZ ds var esa yafcr f'kdk;rksa 
dh la[;k**

**5 esa ls 30 fnuksa ls vfèkd 
yafcr f'kdk;rksa dh la[;k**

13442
489664
-35.08
12262
457

,Vh,e@MsfcV dkMZ	
1814
316892
-13.89
5054
38

**[kkrk [kksyuk@[kkrksa ds 
ifjpkyu esa dfBukÃ**

303
21582
-38.29
458
10

**ofj"B ukxfjdksa@ fnO;kaxksa 
ds fy, isa'ku ,oa lqfoèkk,a**

106
14532
107.54
225
9

_.k ,oa vfxze
128
8594
37.07
332
14

vU;
7392
278931
51.16
14020
1673

dqy
23185
1130195
-16.59
32351
2201

----

#Previous Year (FY 2022-23)

Internet/Mobile/
Electronic Banking
19128
754265
-24.50
13442
263

ATM/Debit Cards
6521
367991
-26.64
1814
1

Account opening/ 
difficulty in operation 
of accounts

235
34976
3.02
303
3

Pension and facilities 
for senior citizens/ 
differently abled

1
7002
147.68
106
0

Loans and advances
60
6270
23.57
128
3

Others
4657
184533
-5.74
7392
185

Total
30602
1355037
-22.05
23185
455

# Data regarding number of complaints includes all type of complaints.
*As per Master List for identifying grounds of complaints as provided in 
Appendix 1 to circular CEPD.CO.PRD.Cir.No.01/13.01.013/2020-21 dated 
January 27, 2021 on ‘Strengthening the Grievance Redress Mechanism of 
Banks’.

**12.	 Disclosure of penalties imposed by the Reserve Bank of  
	
India**

**12.	 i)	
Banking Regulation Act, 1949**

**Sl. 
No.
Current Year (FY ended 31.03.2024)
Previous Year  
(FY Ended 
31.03.2023)**

1.
In exercise of powers conferred under 
section 47A (1)(c) read with sections 46(4)
(i) and 51 (1) of the Banking Regulation Act 
1949, RBI vide speaking order dated 30 
October 2023 imposed, a penalty of ₹72 
Lakh (Rupees Seventy-Two Lakh) on Bank 
for non-compliance with certain provisions 
of ‘Reserve Bank of India (Interest Rate 
on Deposits) Directions, 2016’, ‘Reserve 
Bank of India (Interest Rate on Advances) 
Directions, 2016’ and ‘Master Circular on 
Customer Service in Banks’.

NIL

**12.	 ii)	
Payment and Settlement System Act, 2007:**

**Sl.No.
Current Year
Previous Year**

1.
NIL
NIL

**12.	 iii)	 Government Securities Act, 2006 (Bouncing of SGL):**

**Sl.No.
Current Year
Previous Year**

1.
NIL
NIL

**12.	 (iv)	 Disclosure relating to default under reverse repo  
	
transaction:**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Current Year
Previous Year**

**Number 
of 
instances**

**Quantum of penalty 
paid to Reserve 
Bank of India**

**Number of 
instances
Quantum of penalty 
paid to Reserve 
Bank of India**

NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL

19128
754265
-24.50
13442
263

,Vh,e@MsfcV dkMZ	
6521
367991
-26.64
1814
1

**[kkrk [kksyuk@[kkrksa ds 
ifjpkyu esa dfBukÃ**

235
34976
3.02
303
3

**ofj"B ukxfjdksa@ fnO;kaxksa 
ds fy, isa'ku ,oa lqfoèkk,a**

1
7002
147.68
106
0

_.k ,oa vfxze
60
6270
23.57
128
3

vU;
4657
184533
-5.74
7392
185

dqy
30602
1355037
-22.05
23185
455

**12-	Hkkjrh; fjtoZ cSad }kjk yxk, x, tqekZus dk [kqyklk**

**12-	i½	 cSaÇdx fofu;eu vfèkfu;e] 1949**

**'kwU;**

**Øekad
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

1.
'kwU;
'kwU;

**Øekad
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

1.
'kwU;
'kwU;

**12-	iv½	 fjolZ jsiks ysunsu ds rgr pwd ls lacafèkr çdVhdj.k %**

**¼jkf'k ₹ djksM+ esa½**

----

**13.	 Disclosure on remuneration of Whole Time Directors/  
	
Chief Executive Officer:**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

Name
Designation
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year

Shri Atul Kumar Goel
Managing Director 
& CEO
0.44
0.48

Shri Kalyan Kumar
Executive Director
0.39
0.35

Shri Binod Kumar
Executive Director
0.38
0.13

Shri M Paramasivam
Executive Director
0.39
0.12

Shri Bibhu Prasad 
Mahapatra
Executive Director
0.17
0.00

Shri Vijay Dube 
(Superannuated on 
31.08.2023)

Ex Executive Director
0.63
0.42

Shri Sanjay Kumar
Ex Executive Director
0.00
0.91

Shri Swarup Kumar Saha
Ex Executive Director
0.00
0.13

Total
2.40
2.54

**14.	 Other Disclosure**

**14.	 a)	
Business ratios**

**Particular
Current Year
Previous Year**

Interest Income as a percentage to 
Working Funds
6.98%
6.07%

Non-interest income as a 
percentage to Working Funds
0.87%
0.87%

Cost of Deposits
4.91%
4.10%

Net Interest Margin
3.09%
3.06%

Operating Profit as a percentage to 
Working Funds 
1.63%
1.61%

Return on Assets 
0.54%
0.18%

Business (deposits plus advances) 
per employee (in ₹crore)
23.84
21.64

Profit per employee (in ₹crore) 
0.09
0.03

**14.	 b)	 Bancassurance business**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

Details of Fees/ Brokerage earned 
in respect of Insurance broking, 
agency and bancassurance 
business undertaken by the Bank

(i)	
Life Insurance Business;
338.24
310.39

(ii)	 Non-life Insurance Business;
109.70
117.99

(iii)	 Prime Minister Jeevan Jyoti 
Bima Yojana (PMJJBY);
5.63
5.63

(iv)	 Prime Minister Suraksha 
Bima Yojna
2.26
1.86

**TOTAL
455.83
435.87**

0.44
0.48

Jh dY;k.k dqekj	
dk;Zikyd
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
0.39
0.35

Jh fcuksn dqekj
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
0.38
0.13

Jh ,e ijef'koe
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
0.39
0.12

Jh foHkq çlkn egkik=k
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
0.17
0.00

Jh fot; nqcs 
¼31-08-2023 dks lsokfuo`Ùk½
iwoZ dk;Zikyd funs'kd
0.63
0.42

Jh lat; dqekj
iwoZ dk;Zikyd funs'kd
0.00
0.91

Jh Lo:i dqekj lkgk
iwoZ dk;Zikyd funs'kd
0.00
0.13

dqy
2.40
2.54

**14-	vU; çdVhdj.k**

**14-	,½	 O;olk; vuqikr**

6.98%
6.07%

**dk;Z'khy fufèk ds çfr'kr ds :i esa 
xSj&C;kt vk;**

0.87%
0.87%

tek dh ykxr
4.91%
4.10%

fuoy C;kt ekÆtu
3.09%
3.06%

**dk;Z'khy fufèk ds çfr'kr ds :i esa 
ifjpkyu ykHk**

1.63%
1.61%

vkfLr;ksa ij çfrykHk
0.54%
0.18%

23.84
21.64

(i)	 thou chek O;olk;(
338.24
310.39

(ii)	 xSj&thou chek O;olk;(
109.70
117.99

(iii)	 çèkku ea=h thou T;ksfr chek ;kstuk 
¼ih,etstschokÃ½(

5.63
5.63

(iv)	 çèkkuea=h lqj{kk chek ;kstuk
2.26
1.86

**dqy
455.83
435.87**

----

**14.	 c)	
Marketing and distribution**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Particulars
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year
Details of Fee/remuneration received in 
respect of the marketing and distribution 
function 
(excluding 
bancassurance 
business) undertaken by the Bank
(i)	
Mutual Fund Business;
8.60
8.26
(ii)	 Atal Pension Yojna (APY);
11.07
13.90
(iii)	 Income / Commission on Aadhar;
2.30
3.32
(iv)	 Pension;
114.47
114.45
(v)	 Taxes & Others;
48.67
57.19
(vi)	 Govt. Deposit Scheme;
22.99
17.78
(vii)	 Currency Chest
2.36
2.96
TOTAL
210.46
217.86**

**14.	 d)	 Disclosures 
regarding 
Priority 
Sector 
Lending**

**certificates (PLSCs)**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

Sr. 
No.
Types of PSLCs
PSLC 
bought 
during 
the 
Current 
Year

PSLC 
sold 
during 
the 
Current 
Year

PSLC 
bought 
during 
the 
Previous 
Year

PSLC 
sold 
during 
the 
Previous 
Year

1
Agriculture
11990.00
0.00
8000.00
0.00

2
Small and 
Marginal Farmers
29010.00
4000.00
10500.00
0.00

3
Micro Enterprises
15000.00
0.00
0.00
2207.00

4
General
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

TOTAL
56000.00
4000.00
18500.00
2207.00

Fee Paid/received for 
PSLCs purchased/Sold 
(Excluding GST)

547.28
23.70
175.50
10.51

**14.	 e)	
Provisions and contingencies**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

Provision debited to Profit and Loss Account
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year

i)
Provisions for NPI
-1407.33
173.22

ii)
Provision towards NPA
12345.01
15902.82

iii)
Provision made towards Income Tax
4949.59
1781.06

Current Tax
3,929.96
29.38

Deferred Tax
1,019.63
1751.68

iv)
Provision towards Standard Assets
1.68
1779.06

v)
Other Provisions and Contingencies (with 
details) 

Detail
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year

Standard 
Restructured 
including FITL

85.52
-474.94

Others
711.73
860.33

797.25
385.39

**TOTAL
16686.19
17304.86**

**(i)	 E;qpqvy QaM O;olk;(
8.60
8.26**

**(ii)	 vVy isa'ku ;kstuk ¼,ihokÃ½(
11.07
13.90**

**(iii)	 vkèkkj ij vk;@deh'ku(
2.30
3.32**

**(iv)	 isa'ku(
114.47
114.45**

**(v)	 dj ,oa vU;(
48.67
57.19**

**(vi)	 ljdkjh tek ;kstuk(
22.99
17.78**

**(vii)	 djsalh psLV
2.36
2.96**

**dqy
210.46
217.86**

**Ø- 
la-
ih,l,ylh ds 
çdkj
pkyw o"kZ 
ds nkSjku 
[kjhnk 
x;k 
ih,l,ylh**

**pkyw o"kZ 
ds nkSjku 
cspk x;k 
ih,l,ylh**

**xr o"kZ 
ds nkSjku 
[kjhnk x;k 
ih,l,ylh**

**xr o"kZ 
ds nkSjku 
cspk x;k 
ih,l,ylh**

1
—f"k	
11990.00
0.00
8000.00
0.00

2
NksVs ,oa lhekar 
fdlku

29010.00
4000.00
10500.00
0.00

3
vfr y?kq m|ksx
15000.00
0.00
0.00
2207.00

4
lkekU;
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

dqy
56000.00
4000.00
18500.00
2207.00

**[kjhns x, ih,l,ylh 
ds fy, Hkqxrku fd;k 
x;k 'kqYd ¼th,lVh 
dks NksM+dj½**

547.28
23.70
175.50
10.51

i)
,uihvkÃ ds fy, çkoèkku
-1407.33
173.22

ii)
,uih, ds fy, çkoèkku
12345.01
15902.82

iii)
vk;dj ds fy, fd;k x;k çkoèkku
4949.59
1781.06

orZeku dj
3,929.96
29.38

vkLFkfxr dj
1,019.63
1751.68

iv)
ekud vkfLr;ksa ds fy, çkoèkku
1.68
1779.06

85.52
-474.94

vU;
711.73
860.33

797.25
385.39

**dqy
16686.19
17304.86**

----

**14.	 f)	
Implementation of IFRS converged Indian Accounting**

**Standards (Ind AS)**

The strategy for Ind AS implementation, including the progress 
made in this regard:

“IND AS roadmap for scheduled commercial banks (excluding 
regional rural banks), insurers/insurance companies and non-
banking financial companies (NBFCs) was issued by Union Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs (MCA) through press release dated 18 January 
2016. IND AS was applicable to the Bank in accordance with the 
MCA press release from financial year 2018-19 which was deferred 
to financial year 2019-20 vide RBI’s Press Release (2017-18/2642) 
dated 5 April 2018. RBI has further deferred implementation of 
IND AS till further notice vide its Circular no DBR.BP.BC.No. 
29/21.07.001/2018-19 dated 22.03.2019. The Bank accordingly, 
has appointed a Consultant to assist in implementation of the Ind AS. 
The Audit Committee of the Board is being apprised of the progress 
made from time to time. The Bank has a well-planned strategy for 
Ind AS implementation and has made substantial progress in this 
regard. Further, Bank is submitting the Proforma Ind AS Financial 
Statements to the RBI as per prescribed periodicity.”

**14.	 g)	 Payment of DICGC Insurance Premium**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

Sr. 
No.
Particulars
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year

i)
Payment of DICGC Insurance Premium
1736.44
1591.50

ii)
Arrears in payment of DICGC premium
NIL
NIL

**14.	 h)	 Portfolio-level information on the use of funds raised 
from green deposits:**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

Particulars 
Current 
Financial 
Year 

Previous 
Financial 
Year 

Cumulative* 

Total green deposits raised (A) 
Nil
NA
Nil
Use of green deposit funds** 
(1)	 Renewable Energy

- Not Applicable -

(2)	 Energy Efficiency 
(3)	 Clean Transportation 
(4)	 Climate Change Adaptation 
(5)	 Sustainable Water and Waste 
Management 
(6)	 Pollution Prevention and Control 
(7)	 Green Buildings 
(8)	 Sustainable Management of Living 
Natural Resources and Land Use 
(9)	 Terrestrial and Aquatic Biodiversity 
Conservation 
Total Green Deposit funds allocated  
(B = Sum of 1 to 9) 

Amount of Green Deposit funds not 
allocated (C = A – B) 
Details of the temporary allocation 
of green deposit proceeds pending 
their allocation to the eligible green 
activities/projects

*This contain the cumulative amount since the RE started offering green 
deposits. For example, if a bank has commenced raising green deposits 
from June 1, 2023, then the annual financial statement for the period ending 

ii)
MhvkÃlhthlh çhfe;e Hkqxrku esa cdk;k
'kwU;
'kwU;

**fooj.k
pkyw 
foÙkh; 
o"kZ**

**xr o"kZ 
foÙkh; 
o"kZ**

lap;h* 

- ykxw ugÈ -

----

March 31, 2025, would contain particulars of deposits raised and allocated 
from June 1, 2023, till March 31, 2025. Further, the actual amount of green 
deposits raised during the year and use of such funds shall be given under 
this disclosure. 

**Under each category, REs may provide sub-categories based on the funds 
allocated to each sub-sector. For example, REs may provide sub-categories 
like solar energy, wind energy, etc. under “Renewable Energy”. 

**15.	 Other Disclosures with respect to certain Accounting 
Standards**

**15.	 a)	
Accounting Standard 5 - Net Profit or Loss for the 
period, Prior Period Items and Change in Accounting 
Policy:**

During the Current and Previous year there were no material 
prior period income/expenditure items requiring disclosure under 
Accounting Standard 5. 

There is no material impact of changes in significant Accounting 
Policies followed for preparation of financial results for the quarter 
and year ended March 31, 2024 as compared to those followed for 
the financial statements for the year ended March 31, 2023.

(Previous year: The financial results for the year ended March 31, 
2023 have been prepared following the same significant Accounting 
Policies and practices as those followed in the annual financial 
statements for the year ended March 31, 2022.

**15.	 b)	 Accounting Standard 9 - Revenue Recognition**

Certain items of income are recognized on realization basis as 
per Accounting Policy No. 3.5. However, the said income is not 
considered to be material. (Previous year: Certain items of income 
are recognized on realization basis as per Accounting Policy No. 
3.5. However, the said income is not considered to be material).

**15.	 c)	
Accounting Standard 10 - Properties, Plant and**

**Equipment**

Break-up of total depreciation for the FY ended March 31, 2024 for 
each class of assets:

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Class of assets
Current Year
Previous Year**

Premises
223.03
201.97

Other fixed assets
573.84
547.79

Leased assets
0
0

Computer software
98.38
146.80

**Total
895.25
896.56**

**15-	dqN ys[kkadu ekudksa ds lacaèk esa vU; çdVhdj.k**

**15-	ch½	ys[kk ekud 9 & jktLo ekU;rk**

**15-	lh½	ys[kk ekud 10 & laifr;ka] la;a= vkSj midj.k**

**laifÙk dk oxZ
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

ifjlj
223.03
201.97

vU; vpy laifÙk;ka
573.84
547.79

iês ij nh xÃ laifÙk;ka
0
0

daI;wVj l‚¶Vos;j
98.38
146.80

**dqy
895.25
896.56**

----

**15.	 d)	 Accounting Standard 11 –The Effects of Changes in 
foreign exchange rates:**

**Movement of Exchange Fluctuation Reserve**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Particulars
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year**

Opening balance
230.11
419.43

Addition/Deduction during the year due 
to change in Profit & Loss account
1.12
6.05

Addition/Deduction during the year due 
to translation of Assets & Liabilities
7.65
79.98

Deduction: Seed Capital /Reserves/
Appropriation of Hong Kong Branch 
Closure

0.00
-275.35

Closing Balance
238.88
230.11

**15-	Mh½	ys[kkadu ekud 11 & fons'kh fofue; njksa esa ifjorZu  
	
	
ds çHkko%**

**fooj.k
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

çkjfEHkd 'ks"k
230.11
419.43

1.12
6.05

7.65
79.98

**dVkSrh% çkjfEHkd iwath@vkjf{kr fufèk@
gkaxdkax 'kk[kk can djus dk fofu;kstu**

0.00
-275.35

vafre 'ks"k
238.88
230.11

----

**15-	Ã½	 ys[kkadu ekud 15 & deZpkjh ykHk%**

**rkfydk I & çeq[k chekafdd vuqeku vkSj bu ekU;rkvksa dk vkèkkj**

chekafdd vuqeku
isa'ku
minku
Nqêh udnhdj.k
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
NwV nj
7.25%
7.45%
7.20%
7.45%
7.20%
7.45%

**;kstukxr vkfLr;ksa ij laHkkfor 
ykHk**

7.25%
7.45%
7.20%
7.45%
7.20%
7.45%

osru esa o`f) dh nj
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%

iyk;u nj
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%

49177.52
48456.97
3835.58
4078.52
3791.63
3629.66

tksM+sa%
C;kt ykxr
3544.18
3373.37
256.00
251.26
239.20
211.89

tksM+sa%
orZeku lsok ykxr
393.87
375.38
213.18
224.09
393.54
366.95

?kVk,¡%
çnÙk ykHk
-4170.79
-3719.34
-532.33
-624.34
-643.53
-603.71

 
nkf;Roksa ij chekafdd gkfu@¼ykHk½ 
¼larqyudkjh vkadMsa½

3045.99
691.14
129.00
-93.95
142.83
186.84

**vofèk ds var esa nkf;Roksa dk 
orZeku ewY;**

**51990.77
49177.52
3901.43
3835.58
3923.67
3791.63**

**rkfydk III & ;kstuk vkfLr;ksa ds mfpr ewY; esa ifjorZu**

 
 
isa'ku
minku
Nqêh udnhdj.k

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
vofèk dh 'kq#vkr esa ;kstuk vkfLr;ksa 
dk mfpr ewY;

49133.26
48147.78
4042.76
4071.40
3416.31
3122.19

tksM+sa%
;kstuk vkfLr;ksa ij laHkkfor çfrQy
3540.89
3351.11
279.37
258.55
225.90
189.37

tksM+sa%
cSad }kjk çnÙk ;ksxnku
1887.74
207.53
48.12
305.76
840.52
638.07

0.00
955.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

?kVk,¡%
çnÙk ykHk
-4170.79
-3719.34
-532.33
-624.34
-643.53
-603.71

485.55
191.18
22.26
31.39
80.36
70.39

**vofèk ds var esa ;kstuk vkfLr;ksa 
dk mfpr ewY;**

**50876.65
49133.26
3860.18
4042.76
3919.56
3416.31**

----

**15.	e)	 Accounting Standard 15 – Employees Benefits:**

DISCLOSURE IN ACCORDANCE WITH AS-15(R):  

In line with the accounting policy and as per the Accounting Standard – 15(R), the summarized position of  
employment benefits is as under:

**A. Defined benefit Plans**

**TABLE I - Principal Actuarial Assumptions and the basis of these assumptions**

**Actuarial Assumptions
PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

Discount Rate
7.25%
7.45%
7.20%
7.45%
7.20%
7.45%

Expected Return on Plan Assets
7.25%
7.45%
7.20%
7.45%
7.20%
7.45%

Rate of Escalation In salary
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%

Attrition Rate
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%

                                                                  TABLE II - Changes in Present value of the obligation
(All Amount in ₹ Crore)

 
 
PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Present value of Obligation at the 
beginning of period
49177.52
48456.97
3835.58
4078.52
3791.63
3629.66

Add:
Interest Cost 
3544.18
3373.37
256.00
251.26
239.20
211.89

Add:
Current Service Cost
393.87
375.38
213.18
224.09
393.54
366.95

Less:
Benefits paid
-4170.79
-3719.34
-532.33
-624.34
-643.53
-603.71

 
Actuarial loss / (gain) on 
obligations (Balancing Figure)
3045.99
691.14
129.00
-93.95
142.83
186.84

**Present value of Obligation as 
at the end of the period
51990.77
49177.52
3901.43
3835.58
3923.67
3791.63**

**TABLE III - Changes in the FV of the Plan Assets**

 
 
PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Fair value of Plan Assets, at the 
beginning of period
49133.26
48147.78
4042.76
4071.40
3416.31
3122.19

Add:
Expected return on Plan assets
3540.89
3351.11
279.37
258.55
225.90
189.37

Add:
Contributions paid by Bank
1887.74
207.53
48.12
305.76
840.52
638.07

Add:
Contributions paid by Bank for 
Past Service Cost (on Family 
Pension liability)

0.00
955.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Less:
Benefits Paid
-4170.79
-3719.34
-532.33
-624.34
-643.53
-603.71

Actuarial (loss) / gain on Plan 
Assets (Balancing Figure)
485.55
191.18
22.26
31.39
80.36
70.39

**Fair value of Plan Assets as at 
the end of the period
50876.65
49133.26
3860.18
4042.76
3919.56
3416.31**

----

**rkfydk IV & ;kstuk vkfLr;ksa ij okLrfod çfrQy**

**isa'ku
minku
Nqêh udnhdj.k**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
vof/k ds izkjaHk esa ;kstuk vkfLr;ksa dk 
mfpr ewY;

3540.89
3351.11
279.37
258.55
225.90
189.37

**tksM+sa%
;kstuk vkfLr;ksa ij chekafdd ¼gkfu½ 
@ykHk**

485.55
191.18
22.26
31.39
80.36
70.39

 
;kstuk vkfLr;ksa ij okLrfod çfrQy
4026.44
3542.29
301.63
289.94
306.26
259.76

**rkfydk V & 'kq) chekafdd ¼ykHk½@gkfu dh ekU;rk çkIr**

**isa'ku
minku
Nqêh udnhdj.k**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
vofèk ds fy, nkf;Roksa ij chekafdd 
gkfu@¼ykHk½ & ck/;rk,a

3045.99
691.14
129.00
-93.95
142.83
186.84

 
vofèk ds fy, ;kstuk vkfLr;ksa ij 
chekafdd ¼ykHk½@gkfu

-485.55
-191.18
-22.26
-31.39
-80.36
-70.39

 
vofèk ds fy, dqy ¼ykHk½@gkfu
2560.44
499.96
106.74
-125.34
62.47
116.45

 
vofèk esa ekU; 'kq) chekafdd ¼ykHk½@ 
gkfu

2560.44
499.96
106.74
-125.34
62.47
116.45

 
o"kZ ds var esa vufHkKkr chekafdd 
¼ykHk½@gkfu

-
-
-
-
-
-

**rkfydk VI & rqyu i= esa ekU; jkf'k**

**isa'ku
minku
Nqêh udnhdj.k**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

51990.77
49177.52
3901.43
3835.58
3923.67
3791.63

?kVk,¡%
;kstuk vkfLr;ksa dk mfpr ewY;
50876.65
49133.26
3860.18
4042.76
3919.56
3416.31

 
?kkVk@¼vfèk'ks"k½
1114.12
44.26
41.25
-207.18
4.11
375.32

**'kq) ns;rk@¼vkfLr½
1114.12
44.26
41.25
-207.18
4.11
375.32**

 
rqyu i= esa jkf'k 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
rqyu i= esa ekU;rk çkIr ns;rk
1114.12
44.26
41.25
-207.18
4.11
375.32

 
 
 
 
 
 

**'kq) ns;rk@¼vkfLr½
1114.12
44.26
41.25
-207.18
4.11
375.32**

-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-

----

**TABLE IV - Actual Return on Plan Assets**

**PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Expected return on Plan Assets
3540.89
3351.11
279.37
258.55
225.90
189.37

Add:
Actuarial (loss) / gain on Plan 
Assets
485.55
191.18
22.26
31.39
80.36
70.39

**Actual Return on Plan Assets 
4026.44
3542.29
301.63
289.94
306.26
259.76**

**TABLE V - Net Actuarial (gain) / loss recognized**

**PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Actuarial loss / (gain) for the 
period - Obligations 
3045.99
691.14
129.00
-93.95
142.83
186.84

 
Actuarial (gain)/ loss for the period 
- Plan Assets
-485.55
-191.18
-22.26
-31.39
-80.36
-70.39

 
Total (gain) /loss for the period
2560.44
499.96
106.74
-125.34
62.47
116.45

 
Actuarial (gain)/ loss recognized in 
the period
2560.44
499.96
106.74
-125.34
62.47
116.45

 
Unrecognized Actuarial (gain) / 
loss at the end of the year
-
-
-
-
-
-

**TABLE VI - Amount recognized in Balance Sheet**

**PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Present value of Defined Benefit 
Obligation
51990.77
49177.52
3901.43
3835.58
3923.67
3791.63

Less:
Fair value of Plan Assets
50876.65
49133.26
3860.18
4042.76
3919.56
3416.31

 
Deficit/ (Surplus)
1114.12
44.26
41.25
-207.18
4.11
375.32

 
Net Liability/ (Asset)
1114.12
44.26
41.25
-207.18
4.11
375.32

 
Amounts in the Balance Sheet
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Liability Recognized in the 
Balance Sheet
1114.12
44.26
41.25
-207.18
4.11
375.32

 
Assets Recognized in the Balance 
Sheet (on Family Pension liability)
 
 
 
 
 
 

**Net Liability/ (Asset)
1114.12
44.26
41.25
-207.18
4.11
375.32**

 
Negative amount determined 
under Paragraph 55 of AS-15 (R)
-
-
-
-
-
-

 
Present value of available 
refunds and  reductions in future  
contributions

-
-
-
-
-
-

 
Asset recognized as per 
Paragraph 59 (b) of AS-15 (R)
-
-
-
-
-
-

----

**rkfydk VII & ykHk vkSj gkfu [kkrs esa ekU;rk çkIr O;;**

**isa'ku
minku
Nqêh udnhdj.k**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
orZeku lsok ykxr
393.87
375.38
213.18
224.09
393.54
366.95

tksM+sa%
C;kt ykxr
3544.18
3373.37
256.00
251.26
239.20
211.89

?kVk,¡%
;kstuk laifÙk ij laHkkfor ykHk
-3540.89
-3351.11
-279.37
-258.55
-225.90
-189.37

2560.44
499.96
106.74
-125.34
62.47
116.45

-
1520.16
-
-
-
-

 
ykHk vkSj gkfu ds  fooj.k esa ekU;rk 
çkIr O;;

2957.60
2417.76
296.55
91.46
469.31
505.92

**rkfydk VIII & rqyu i= esa ekU; gksus okyh 'kq) ns;rk esa ?kV&c<+**

**isa'ku
minku
Nqêh udnhdj.k**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
çkjfEHkd 'kq) ns;rk
44.26
-1210.97
-207.18
7.12
375.32
507.47

tksM+sa%
O;;
2957.60
2417.76
296.55
91.46
469.31
505.92

?kVk,¡%
lanÙk va'knku
-1887.74
-1162.53
-48.12
-305.76
-840.52
-638.07

?kVk,¡%
daiuh }kjk Hkqxrku fd, x, ykHk
-
-
-
-
-
-

 
vafre 'kq) ns;rk ¼orZeku vofèk esa 
rqyu i= esa ekU; ns;rk½

1114.12
44.26
41.25
-207.18
4.11
375.32

**rkfydk IX & orZeku vofèk ds fy, jkf'k**

**isa'ku
minku
Nqêh udnhdj.k**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
nkf;Roksa dk orZeku ewY;
51990.77
49177.52
3901.43
3835.58
3923.67
3791.63

?kVk,¡%
;kstuk vkfLr;ksa dk mfpr ewY;
50876.65
49133.26
3860.18
4042.76
3919.56
3416.31

 
vfèk'ks"k@¼?kkVk½
-1114.12
-44.26
-41.25
207.18
-4.11
-375.32

 
;kstuk ns;rkvksa esa vuqHkkfod 
lek;kstu & gkfu@¼ykHk½

4214.80
1763.45
47.86
31.43
110.94
213.31

 
;kstuk vkfLr;ksa esa vuqHkkfod 
lek;kstu & ¼gkfu½@ykHk

485.55
191.18
22.26
31.39
80.36
70.39

----

**TABLE VII - Expense to be recognized in Profit and loss Account**

**PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Current Service Cost
393.87
375.38
213.18
224.09
393.54
366.95

Add:
Interest cost
3544.18
3373.37
256.00
251.26
239.20
211.89

Less:
Expected return on Plan assets
-3540.89
-3351.11
-279.37
-258.55
-225.90
-189.37

Add:
Net Actuarial (gain) / loss 
recognized in year
2560.44
499.96
106.74
-125.34
62.47
116.45

Add:
Past Service Cost-Recognized 
(on Family Pension liability)
-
1520.16
-
-
-
-

 
Expenses recognized in the 
statement of profit and loss
2957.60
2417.76
296.55
91.46
469.31
505.92

**TABLE VIII - Movement in Net Liability to be recognized in Balance Sheet**

**PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Opening Net Liability
44.26
-1210.97
-207.18
7.12
375.32
507.47

Add:
Expense
2957.60
2417.76
296.55
91.46
469.31
505.92

Less: 
Contributions Paid
-1887.74
-1162.53
-48.12
-305.76
-840.52
-638.07

Less:
Benefits Paid by the company
-
-
-
-
-
-

 
Closing Net Liability/ (Asset) 
recognised in B/S in current 
period)

1114.12
44.26
41.25
-207.18
4.11
375.32

**TABLE IX - Amount for the current Period**

**PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Present value of Obligation
51990.77
49177.52
3901.43
3835.58
3923.67
3791.63

 Less:
Fair value of Plan Assets
50876.65
49133.26
3860.18
4042.76
3919.56
3416.31

 
Surplus / (Deficit) 
-1114.12
-44.26
-41.25
207.18
-4.11
-375.32

 
Experience Adjustments in Plan 
Liabilities -loss / (gain)
4214.80
1763.45
47.86
31.43
110.94
213.31

 
Experience Adjustments in Plan 
Assets  (loss) / gain 
485.55
191.18
22.26
31.39
80.36
70.39

----

**isa'ku
minku
Nqêh udnhdj.k**

31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
Hkkjr ljdkj dh çfrHkwfr;k¡
2.80%
3.00%
4.93%
4.85%
0.00%
0.00%

jkT; ljdkj çfrHkwfr
9.48%
10.05%
7.64%
5.90%
0.00%
0.00%

mPp fdLe d‚iksZjsV ckaM
5.77%
5.85%
2.97%
3.28%
0.00%
0.00%

**lwphc) dEifu;ksa ds bfDoVh 'ks;j@E;wP;wvy 
Q.M fuos'k**

0.23%
0.24%
0.54%
0.41%
0.00%
0.00%

laifÙk
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

fo'ks"k tek ;kstuk@,QMhvkj	
3.27%
2.47%
5.07%
3.80%
0.00%
0.00%

**chekdrkZ }kjk çcafèkr fufèk;k¡@thou chek 
daifu;ksa esa fuos'k**

75.12%
75.81%
75.36%
71.82%
100.00%
100.00%

vU; tekjkf'k;ka] mip; vkfn
3.33%
2.58%
3.49%
9.94%
0.00%
0.00%

**dqy tksM+	
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%**

**rkfydk XI & vkxkeh o"kZ ds nkSjku m|e ds va'knku dk Js"Bre vuqeku**

31.03.2025
31.03.2024
31.03.2025
31.03.2024
31.03.2025
31.03.2024
vkxkeh o"kZ ds nkSjku cSad dk Js"Bre va'knku 
dk vuqeku

1950.00
890.00
240.00
210.00
510.00
440.00

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

nkf;Ro dk orZeku ewY;
1207.03
216.35
91.68
257.64
22.11
20.24

laØe.k'khy ns;rk dk çkjfEHkd 'ks"k
-
-
-
-
-
-

o"kZ ds nkSjku ekU; laØe.k'khy ns;rk
-
-
-
-
-
-

laØe.k'khy ns;rk dk vafre 'ks"k
-
-
-
-
-
-

rqyui= esa ekU; ns;rk
1207.03
216.35
91.68
257.64
22.11
20.24

----

**TABLE X - Major Categories of Plan Assets (as percentage of Total Plan Assets) as managed by Trust**

**PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

Government Of India Securities
2.80%
3.00%
4.93%
4.85%
0.00%
0.00%

State Govt. Securities
9.48%
10.05%
7.64%
5.90%
0.00%
0.00%

High Quality Corporate Bonds
5.77%
5.85%
2.97%
3.28%
0.00%
0.00%

Equity Shares of listed companies/Mutual 
fund investments
0.23%
0.24%
0.54%
0.41%
0.00%
0.00%

Property
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

Special deposit scheme/FDR’s
3.27%
2.47%
5.07%
3.80%
0.00%
0.00%

Funds managed by Insurer/ Investment in 
Life Insurance Companies
75.12%
75.81%
75.36%
71.82%
100.00%
100.00%

Other Deposits, Accruals etc.
3.33%
2.58%
3.49%
9.94%
0.00%
0.00%

**TOTAL
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%**

**TABLE XI - Enterprise’s Best Estimate of Contribution during Next Year**

**Pension (Funded)
Gratuity (Funded)
Leave Encashment (Funded)**

31.03.2025
31.03.2024
31.03.2025
31.03.2024
31.03.2025
31.03.2024

Bank’s best estimate of Contribution  during 
next year
1950.00
890.00
240.00
210.00
510.00
440.00

**TABLE XII - Other Long Term employee benefits (Unfunded)**

**Particulars**

**Sick Leave & Other Leaves 
(Unfunded)
Leave Fare concession 
(unfunded)
Silver Jubilee Bonus 
(unfunded)**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

Present Value of Obligation
1207.03
216.35
91.68
257.64
22.11
20.24

Opening Balance of Transitional Liability
-
-
-
-
-
-

Transitional Liability recognized in the year
-
-
-
-
-
-

Closing Balance Of Transitional Liability
-
-
-
-
-
-

Liability Recognized in balance Sheet 
1207.03
216.35
91.68
257.64
22.11
20.24

**Particulars
Basis of assumption**

Discount Rate
Discount Rate has been determined by reference to market yields at the balance Sheet date on Government 
bonds (published by FBIL) of term consistent with currency and estimated term of the obligations.

Expected Rate of Return on 
Plan Assets
It is assumed that return on the plan assets pertaining to the Pension will be 7.25% and for Gratuity and 
Leave Encashment fund will be 7.20% p.a. 

Salary Escalation Rate (SER)
Based on the broad guidance provided by IBA, SER for the bank has been taken at 6.00% p.a. 

Attrition Rate
Attrition rate is assumed at 1% taken with reference to past experience and expected future experience 
related to voluntary withdrawals.

----

**15. e) 
Defined Contribution Plans: -**

“The Bank has Defined Contribution Plan applicable to all categories 
of employees joining the Bank on or after 01.04.2010. The 
scheme is managed by NPS trust under the aegis of the Pension 
Fund Regulatory and Development Authority. National Securities 
Depository Limited (Protean eGov Technologies Limited) has been 
appointed as the Central Record Keeping Agency for the NPS. 

The details of contribution are as under: -

During the FY 2023-24 = ₹ 1382.37 Crores 

During the FY 2022-23 = ₹ 1220.32 Crores

**15 f) 
Accounting Standard 17 – Segment Reporting**

**Segment Identification**

**I. 
Primary (Business Segment):**

The following are the primary segments of the Bank:-

i)	
Treasury: The Treasury Segment includes the entire 
investment portfolio and trading in foreign exchange contracts 
and derivative contracts. The revenue of the treasury segment 
primarily consists of fees and gains or losses from trading 
operations and interest income on the investment portfolio.

ii)	
Corporate / Wholesale Banking: As per the RBI guidelines 
RBI/2020-21/53, 
DOR.No.BP.BC.23/21.06.201/2020-21, 
dated 12th October 2020, the Corporate / Wholesale Banking 
segment comprises the lending activities of borrowers having 
exposure of ₹7.50Crores and above.

iii)	
Retail Banking: The Retail Banking Segment comprises of 
borrower accounts having exposure of less than ₹7.50Crores.

iv)	 Other Banking Operations Segments not classified under (i) to 
(iii) above are classified under this primary segment.

**II. 
Secondary (Geographical Segment):**

i)	
Domestic Operations - Branches/Offices having operations in 
India

ii)	
Foreign Operations - Branches/Offices having operations 
outside India and offshore banking units having operations in 
India.

**III. Basis of allocation**

	
The interest income is allocated on the basis of actual interest 
received from different segments

	
Expenses not directly attributable are allocated on the basis 
of Interest income earned by the wholesale banking / retail 
banking segment/other banking segment

	
Capital employed for each segment is calculated based on the 
assets and liabilities of that particular segment

	
The Bank has certain common assets and liabilities, which 
cannot be attributed to any segment, and the same are treated 
as unallocated.

**15-	Ã½  ifjHkkf"kr va'knku ;kstuk,¡%&**

**15-	,Q½	  ys[kk ekud 17 & [kaMokj fjiksÉVx**

**[kaM igpku**

**I.	 çkFkfed ¼O;kolkf;d [kaM½%**

**II. 	f}rh;d ¼HkkSxksfyd [kaM½ %**

i½	 ?kjsyw ifjpkyu & Hkkjr esa ifjpkfyr 'kk[kk,a@dk;kZy; A 

Contribution 
includes both 
Bank + Employee 
contribution  

**;ksxnku esa cSad $ 
deZpkjh nksuksa dk 
;ksxnku 'kkfey gS**

----

**PART A – BUSINESS SEGMENTS**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Sr. 
No.
Particulars**

**Year Ended**

**31.03.2024 
Audited
31.03.2023 
Audited**

**1
Segment Revenue**

 
(a)	 Treasury Operations
31591.96
26806.82

 
(b)	 Corporate/Wholesale 
Banking
51613.87
40482.23

 
(c)	 Retail Banking
34668.13
26872.68

 
	
1)	 Digital Banking
0.13
0.02

 
	
2)	 Other Retail Banking
34668.00
26872.66

 
(d)	 Other Banking Operations
2411.20
3124.91

**Total Revenue
120285.16
97286.64**

**2
Segment Results**

 
(a)	 Treasury Operations
7599.64
6807.92

 
(b)	 Corporate/Wholesale 
Banking
4505.80
-2966.67

 
(c)	 Retail Banking
5689.10
3853.99

 
	
1)	 Digital Banking
-6.39
-4.35

 
	
2)	 Other Retail Banking
5695.49
3858.34

 
(d) Other Banking Operations
748.15
1149.12

**Total 
18542.69
8844.36**

 
Unallocated Expenditure
5348.48
4556.10

**Profit before Tax
13194.21
4288.26**

 
Provision for Tax
4949.59
1781.06

 
Extraordinary items
0
0

**Net profit
8244.62
2507.20**

**3
Segment Assets**

 
(a)	 Treasury Operations
469259.29
467011.82

 
(b)	 Corporate/Wholesale 
Banking
664707.59
600703.68

 
(c)	 Retail Banking
341974.64
299324.50

 
	
1)	 Digital Banking
2.30
1.86

 
	
2)	 Other Retail Banking
341972.34
299322.64

 
(d)	 Other Banking Operations
41868.31
47728.85

 
(e)	 Unallocated
44025.18
47062.51

**Total 
1561835.01
1461831.36**

**4
Segment Liabilities**

 
(a)	 Treasury Operations
449440.63
449348

 
(b)	 Corporate/Wholesale 
Banking
636634.39
577983.22

 
(c)	 Retail Banking
327531.71
288003.13

 
	
1)	 Digital Banking
21.44
6.09

 
	
2)	 Other Retail Banking
327510.27
287997.04

 
(d)	 Other Banking Operations
40100.05
45923.59

 
(e)	 Unallocated
1651.66
717.76

**Total 
1455358.44
1361975.70**

**Øe 
la-
fooj.k
lekfIr o"kZ**

**31.03.2024 
ys[kkijhf{kr
31.03.2023 
ys[kkijhf{kr
1
[kaM jktLo**

 
(a)	 Vªstjh ifjpkyu
31591.96
26806.82

 
(b)	 d‚jiksjsV@Fkksd cSaÇdx
51613.87
40482.23

 
(c)	 fjVsy cSaÇdx
34668.13
26872.68

 
	
1)	 fMftVy cSaÇdx
0.13
0.02

 
	
2)	 vU; fjVsy cSaÇdx
34668.00
26872.66

 
(d)	 vU; cSaÇdx ifjpkyu
2411.20
3124.91

**dqy jktLo
120285.16
97286.64**

2
[kaM ifj.kke
 
(a)	 Vªstjh ifjpkyu
7599.64
6807.92

 
(b)	 d‚jiksjsV@Fkksd cSaÇdx
4505.80
-2966.67

 
(c)	 fjVsy cSaÇdx
5689.10
3853.99

 
	
1)	 fMftVy cSaÇdx
-6.39
-4.35

 
	
2)	 vU; fjVsy cSaÇdx
5695.49
3858.34

 
(d)	 vU; cSaÇdx ifjpkyu
748.15
1149.12

**dqy
18542.69
8844.36**

 
vukcafVr O;;
5348.48
4556.10

**dj ds iwoZ ykHk
13194.21
4288.26**

 
dj gsrq çkoèkku
4949.59
1781.06

 
vlkekU; ensa
0
0

**fuoy ykHk
8244.62
2507.20**

**3
vkfLr [kaM**

 
(a)	 Vªstjh ifjpkyu
469259.29
467011.82

 
(b)	 d‚jiksjsV@Fkksd cSaÇdx
664707.59
600703.68

 
(c)	 fjVsy cSaÇdx
341974.64
299324.50

 
	
1)	 fMftVy cSaÇdx
2.30
1.86

 
	
2)	 vU; fjVsy cSaÇdx
341972.34
299322.64

 
(d)	 vU; cSaÇdx ifjpkyu
41868.31
47728.85

 
(e)	 vukcafVr
44025.18
47062.51

**dqy
1561835.01
1461831.36**

**4
ns;rk [kaM**

 
(a)	 Vªstjh ifjpkyu
449440.63
449348

 
(b)	 d‚jiksjsV@Fkksd cSaÇdx
636634.39
577983.22

 
(c)	 fjVsy cSaÇdx
327531.71
288003.13

 
	
1)	 fMftVy cSaÇdx
21.44
6.09

 
	
2)	 vU; fjVsy cSaÇdx
327510.27
287997.04

 
(d)	 vU; cSaÇdx ifjpkyu
40100.05
45923.59

 
(e)	 vukcafVr
1651.66
717.76

**dqy
1455358.44
1361975.70**

----

**5
Capital Employed**

 
(a)	 Treasury Operations
19818.66
17663.82

 
(b)	 Corporate/Wholesale 
Banking
28073.20
22720.46

 
(c)	 Retail Banking
14442.93
11321.37

 
	
1)	 Digital Banking
-19.14
-4.23

 
	
2)	 Other Retail Banking
14462.07
11325.60

 
(d)	 Other Banking Operations
1768.26
1805.26

 
(e)	 Unallocated
42373.52
46344.75

**Total Capital Employed
106476.57
99855.66**

**PART B - GEOGRAPHICAL SEGMENTS**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Sr.No.
Particulars**

**STANDALONE**

**Year Ended**

**31.03.2024 
Audited
31.03.2023 
Audited**

**1
 Revenue**

 
(a)  Domestic
116632.53
95277.08

 
(b)  International
3652.63
2009.56

**Total
120285.16
97286.64**

**2
Assets**

 
(a)  Domestic
1491629.31
1400620.35

 
(b)  International
70205.70
61211.01

**Total
1561835.01
1461831.36**

**Notes:**

1.	 Segment Liabilities are distributed in the ratio of their respective 
Segment Assets.

2.	 As per RBI Circular RBI/2022-23/19 DOR.AUT.REC. 12/22.01.001/2022-
23 dated April 07, 2022, for the purpose of disclosure under Accounting 
Standard 17, Segment Reporting, Digital Banking Segment has been 
identified as sub-segment under Retail Banking by Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI). As on March 31, 2024, 8 (eight) Digital Banking Units (DBUs) 
of the Bank have commenced operations and the segment information 
disclosed as Digital Banking under Retail Banking Operations is related 
to the said DBUs.

3.	 Figures of the previous period have been re-grouped/re-classified 
wherever necessary.

**15.	 g)	 Accounting Standard 18 - Disclosure of Related 
Parties as per Accounting Standard – 18 issued by 
ICAI:**

**Names of the related parties and their relationship with the 
Bank:**

**Key Management Personnel (KMP):**

**i)	
Shri Atul Kumar Goel, Managing Director & CEO**

**ii)	
Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director up to 31.08.2023***

**iii)	 Shri Kalyan Kumar, Executive Director**

**iv)	 Shri Binod Kumar, Executive Director**

**v)	
Shri M. Paramasivam, Executive Director**

**vi)	 Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, Executive Director**

* Tenure completed on 31.08.2023

**5
fu;ksftr iwath**

 
(a)	 Vªstjh ifjpkyu
19818.66
17663.82

 
(b)	 d‚jiksjsV@Fkksd cSaÇdx
28073.20
22720.46

 
(c)	 fjVsy cSaÇdx
14442.93
11321.37

 
	
1)	 fMftVy cSaÇdx
-19.14
-4.23

 
	
2)	 vU; fjVsy cSaÇdx
14462.07
11325.60

 
(d)	 vU; cSaÇdx ifjpkyu
1768.26
1805.26

 
(e)	 vukcafVr
42373.52
46344.75

**fu;ksftr dqy iwath
106476.57
99855.66**

**Øe 
la-
fooj.k**

**,dy
lekfIr o"kZ**

**31.03.2024 
ys[kkijhf{kr
31.03.2023 
ys[kkijhf{kr
1
 jktLo**

 
(d)  ?kjsyw
116632.53
95277.08

 
(ch)  varjkZ"Vªh;
3652.63
2009.56

**dqy
120285.16
97286.64**

**2
vkfLr;ka**

 
(d)  ?kjsyw
1491629.31
1400620.35

 
(ch)  varjkZ"Vªh;
70205.70
61211.01

**dqy
1561835.01
1461831.36**

**15- th½	 ys[kk ekud 18 & vkÃlh,vkÃ }kjk tkjh ys[kk  
ekud & 18 ds vuqlkj lacafèkr i{kksa dk çdVhdj.k%**

**i½	 Jh vrqy dqekj xks;y] çcaèk funs'kd ,oa eq[; dk;Zikyd vfèkdkjh**

**ii½	 Jh fot; nqcs] dk;Zikyd funs'kd fnukad 31-08-2023 rd***

**iii½	 Jh dY;k.k dqekj] dk;Zikyd funs'kd**

**iv½	 Jh fcuksn dqekj] dk;Zikyd funs'kd**

**v½	 Jh ,e- ijef'koe] dk;Zikyd funs'kd**

**vi½	 Jh fcHkq çlkn egkik=] dk;Zikyd funs'kd**

* fnukad 31-08-2023 dks dk;Zdky lekIr

----

**Subsidiaries:**

i)	
PNB Gilts Ltd.

ii)	
PNB Investment Services Ltd.

iii)	 PNB Cards and Services Ltd.

iv)	 Punjab National Bank (International) Ltd., UK.

v)	
Druk PNB Bank Ltd, Bhutan.

**Associates:**

i)	
PNB Metlife India Insurance Co. Ltd*

ii)	
PNB Housing Finance Limited

iii)	 JSC (Tengri Bank), Almaty, Kazakhstan**

iv)	 Canara HSBC Life Insurance Co. Ltd.

v)	
India SME Asset Reconstruction Co. Ltd.

vi)	 Everest Bank Limited, Kathmandu, Nepal

vii)	 Dakshin Bihar Gramin Bank, Patna

viii)	 Himachal Pradesh Gramin Bank, Mandi

ix)	 Punjab Gramin Bank, Kapurthala

x)	
Sarva Haryana Gramin Bank, Rohtak

xi)	 Prathama UP Gramin Bank, Moradabad

xii)	 Assam Gramin Vikas Bank, Guwahati

xiii)	 Bangiya Gramin Vikas Bank, West Bengal

xiv)	 Manipur Rural Bank, Imphal

xv)	 Tripura Gramin Bank, Agartala

*PNB has acquired 30% stake in PNB Metlife at a consideration of Rs. 
700.48 as brand equity.

**AFR revoked license of JSC Tengri Bank w.e.f. 18.09.2020 and is under 
Liquidation.

**Others:**

i)	
PNB Centenary Rural Development Trust

**leuq"kaxh%**

i½	 ih,uch fxYV~l fy- 

ii½	 ih,uch bUosLVesaV lÆols+t fy-  

iii½	 ih,uch dkM~lZ ,aM lÆolst fy- 

iv½	 iatkc uS'kuy cSad ¼baVjus'kuy½ fy-] ;wds-

v½	 Mªd ih,uch cSad fy-] HkwVku-

**lg;ksxh%**

i½	 ih,uch esVykbQ bafM;k bU';ksjsUl daiuh fy*

ii½	 ih,uch gkmÇlx Qkbusal fy-

iv½	 dsujk ,p,lchlh bU';ksjsUl da- fy-

vii½	 nf{k.k fcgkj xzkeh.k cSad] iVuk           

viii½	fgekpy çns'k xzkeh.k cSad] e.Mh              

ix½	 iatkc xzkeh.k cSad] diwjFkyk                

x½	 loZ gfj;k.kk xzkeh.k cSad] jksgrd

xi½	 çFkek ;wih xzkeh.k cSad] eqjknkckn

xii½	 vle xzkeh.k fodkl cSad] xqokgkVh 

xiii½	cafx;k xzkeh.k fodkl cSad] if'pe caxky

xiv½	ef.kiqj xzkeh.k cSad] baQky 

xv½	f=iqjk xzkeh.k cSad] vxjryk 

**vU;%**

i½	 ih,uch lsaVsujh :jy MsoyiesaV VªLV

----

ikfjJfed
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
-
 2.40
-
2.40
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
-
(2.54)
-
(2.54)
mèkkj

o"kZ ds var rd cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
24.98
-
-
24.98
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(25.00)
-
-
(25.00)

o"kZ ds nkSjku vfèkdre cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
24.98
-
-
24.98
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(25.00)
-
-
(25.00)
tekjkf'k

o"kZ ds var esa cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
892.02
-
-
892.02
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(1,079.87)
-
-
(1,079.87)

o"kZ ds var esa cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
2.12
-
-
2.12
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(0.64)
-
-
(0.64)

o"kZ ds nkSjku vfèkdre cdk;k jkf'k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
2.12
-
-
2.12
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(2.77)
-
-
(2.77)
vfxze ¼vU;½

o"kZ ds var esa cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
2,691.63
-
-
2,691.63
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(4,636.68)
-
-
(4,636.68)

o"kZ ds nkSjku vfèkdre cdk;k jkf'k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
4,892.67
-
-
4,892.67
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(4,651.76)
-
-
(4,651.76)
fuos'k

o"kZ ds var esa cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
1,316.29
-
-
1,316.29
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(817.54)
-
-
(817.54)

o"kZ ds var esa cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
104.41
-
-
104.41
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(84.70)
-
-
(84.70)

o"kZ ds var esa cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
8.92
-
-
8.92
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(7.63)
-
-
(7.63)

o"kZ ds nkSjku vfèkdre cdk;k jkf'k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
8.92
-
-
8.92
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(7.63)
-
-
(7.63)

vU; ij pqdk;k C;kt 
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
2.12
-
-
2.12
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(9.45)
-
-
(9.45)

C;kt çkIr & vU;	
 
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
555.96
-
-
555.96
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(556.62)
-
-
(556.62)

çcaèku lafonk,¡
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
0.54
-
-
0.54
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(0.54)
-
-
(0.54)

cSad çHkkj	
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
1.12
-
-
1.12
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(1.26)
-
-
(1.26)

vU; O;;
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
37.73
-
-
37.73
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(5.42)
-
-
(5.42)

vU; vk;
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
393.53
-
-
393.53
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(322.55)
-
-
(322.55)

----

**Transactions with Related Parties: 
(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Particulars
Parent** (as per 
ownership or 
control)**

**Subsidiaries**
Associates/ 
Joint ventures
Key 
Management 
Personnel**

**Relatives of Key 
Management 
Personnel**

**Total**

Remuneration 
 NA 
 NA 
-
 2.40
-
2.40
 NA 
 NA 
-
(2.54)
-
(2.54)
Borrowings

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
24.98
-
-
24.98
 NA 
 NA 
(25.00)
-
-
(25.00)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
24.98
-
-
24.98
 NA 
 NA 
(25.00)
-
-
(25.00)
Deposits

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
892.02
-
-
892.02
 NA 
 NA 
(1,079.87)
-
-
(1,079.87)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
1,135.78
-
-
1,135.78
 NA 
 NA 
(1,134.32)
-
-
(1,134.32)
Other Liabilities

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
2.12
-
-
2.12
 NA 
 NA 
(0.64)
-
-
(0.64)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
2.12
-
-
2.12
 NA 
 NA 
(2.77)
-
-
(2.77)
Advances (Others)

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
2,691.63
-
-
2,691.63
 NA 
 NA 
(4,636.68)
-
-
(4,636.68)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
4,892.67
-
-
4,892.67
 NA 
 NA 
(4,651.76)
-
-
(4,651.76)
Investments

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
1,316.29
-
-
1,316.29
 NA 
 NA 
(817.54)
-
-
(817.54)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
1,316.29
-
-
1,316.29
 NA 
 NA 
(817.54)
-
-
(817.54)
Other Assets

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
104.41
-
-
104.41
 NA 
 NA 
(84.70)
-
-
(84.70)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
121.58
-
-
121.58
 NA 
 NA 
(152.03)
-
-
(152.03)
Non funded Commitments (LCs/BGs)

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
8.92
-
-
8.92
 NA 
 NA 
(7.63)
-
-
(7.63)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
8.92
-
-
8.92
 NA 
 NA 
(7.63)
-
-
(7.63)

Interest Paid Others
 NA 
 NA 
2.12
-
-
2.12
 NA 
 NA 
(9.45)
-
-
(9.45)

Interest received Others
 NA 
 NA 
555.96
-
-
555.96
 NA 
 NA 
(556.62)
-
-
(556.62)

Management contracts
 NA 
 NA 
0.54
-
-
0.54
 NA 
 NA 
(0.54)
-
-
(0.54)

Bank Charges
 NA 
 NA 
1.12
-
-
1.12
 NA 
 NA 
(1.26)
-
-
(1.26)

Other Expenditure
 NA 
 NA 
37.73
-
-
37.73
 NA 
 NA 
(5.42)
-
-
(5.42)

Other Income
 NA 
 NA 
393.53
-
-
393.53
 NA 
 NA 
(322.55)
-
-
(322.55)

Notes:	 1.	 **The transactions with the subsidiaries and certain associates have not been disclosed in view of para-9 of AS-18 ‘Related Party Disclosure’, which 
exempts state controlled enterprises from making any disclosures pertaining to their transactions with other related parties, which are also state 
controlled. 

	
2.	 Further, in terms of Paragraph 5 of AS 18, transactions in the nature of Banker-Customer relationship have not been disclosed including those with 
Key Management Personnel and relatives of Key Management Personnel.

	
3.	 The amounts reported are net of provision, if any.

	
4.	 Figures in brackets relate to previous year and have been regrouped / rearranged / reclassified wherever necessary.

----

**15.	 h)	 Accounting Standard 19 – Lease**

**i.	
Operating lease primarily comprise office premises, which are**

**renewable at the option of the bank normally at the end of**

**every 3rd / 5th year.**

**ii.	
As per information available, Non-Cancellable lease as on**

**31.03.2024: NIL (Previous year: NIL).**

**iii.	
Bank has created lease equalization reserve for Rs. 21.70 Cr.**

**on the straight line method for the period ended March 2024.**

**iv.	
Amount of lease payment recognized in P & L Account for**

**operating lease is as under:**

**Current Year Ended 
31.03.2024
Previous Year Ended 
31.03.2023**

No. of lease / 
rented premises
(Amount in 
₹Crore)
No. of lease / 
rented premises
(Amount in 
₹Crore)

15912
814.59
15813
802.06

**15.	 i)	
Accounting Standard 20 - Earnings per Share**

**Sl.No.
Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

A
EPS - Basic / Diluted  
(in ₹) (Non Annualized)
7.49
2.28

B
Amount used as 
numerator Profit/ (Loss) 
after tax (₹ in 000)

82446155
25072049

C
Nominal value of share
₹2.00 each
₹2.00 each

D
Weighted average 
number of equity shares 
used as the denominator

11011015558
11011015558

**15.	 j)	
(i)  Accounting Standard 22- Accounting for taxes on**

**Income**

**The Bank has recognized deferred tax assets and liability as per 
accounting policy no. 10. Major components of which are set out 
below:**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

**Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

**Deferred Tax Assets**

Provision for Leave encashment 
& others
426.79
137.95

Provision for bad & doubtful debts
23107.83
24319.67

Taxable loss (carried forward)
0.00
0.00

Other Contingencies
259.68
248.00

**Total
23794.30
24705.62**

**Deferred Tax Liabilities**

Depreciation on fixed assets
-335.25
-304.80

Special Reserve u/s 36(1)(viii) of 
Income Tax Act 1961.
1388.02
1249.26

**Total
1052.77
944.46**

**Deferred Tax Assets (Net)
22741.53
23761.16**

**15-	,p½ ys[kk ekud 19 & iêk**

**15- vkbZ½  ys[kk ekud 20 & çfr 'ks;j vtZu**

7.49
2.28

ch
dj ds i'pkr x.kd ds :i 
esa mi;ksx dh xÃ jkf'k ij 
ykHk@¼gkfu½ ¼₹ 000 esa½

82446155
25072049

11011015558
11011015558

**15-	ts½	¼i½ ys[kk ekud & 22 % vk; ij djksa ds lEcUèk esa  
	
	
   ys[kkadu**

v'kksè; ,oa lafnXèk _.kksa ds fy, çkoèkku
23107.83
24319.67

dj ;ksX; gkfu ¼vkxs ys tk;k x;k½
0.00
0.00

vU; vkdfLedrk,a
259.68
248.00

**dqy
23794.30
24705.62**

vkLFkfxr dj ns;rk,a
vpy vkfLr;ksa ij ewY;ºzkl
-335.25
-304.80

1388.02
1249.26

**dqy
1052.77
944.46**

**vkLFkfxr dj vkfLr;ka ¼fuoy½
22741.53
23761.16**

----

The deferred tax assets ₹ 1019.63 Crore is debited to Profit & Loss 
Account for the financial year ended 31.03.2024 (Previous year: 
Debited ₹ 1751.69 Crores).

ii)	
Current Tax: During the financial year ended 31.03.2023 the 
bank has debited ₹3929.96 Crore to Profit & Loss Account 
(Previous Year: Debited ₹29.38 Crore) on account of current 
tax. Accordingly, the total tax expenses on account of current 
tax & deferred tax assets charged to Profit & Loss account 
amounts to ₹4949.59 Crore.

iii)	 Tax Paid in advance/Tax deducted at source appearing under 
“Other Assets” includes disputed amount adjusted by the 
department/paid by the Bank in respect of tax demands for 
various assessment years.

iv)	 No provision is considered necessary in respect of disputed 
Income Tax demands of ₹6956.02 Crore (Previous year ₹ 
8475.38 Crore) as in the Bank’s view, duly supported by 
expert opinion and/or decision in Bank’s own appeals on same 
issues, additions / disallowances made are not sustainable.

v)	
The Bank has evaluated the options available under section 
115BAA of Income Tax Act, 1961 and opted to continue to 
recognize the taxes on income for the financial year ended 
31.03.2024 as per the earlier provisions of Income Tax Act, 
1961.

vi)	 The current tax expenses and deferred tax expenses are 
determined in accordance with the provisions of the Income 
Tax Act, 1961 and as per the Accounting Standard 22- 
“Accounting for Taxes on Income” issued by the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of India respectively. The current Tax 
in India has been calculated in accordance with the provisions 
of Income Tax Act 1961 after taking appropriate relief for taxes 
paid on foreign jurisdiction.

**15.	 k)	
Accounting Standard 23 - Accounting for Investments 
in Associates in Consolidated Financial Statements**

Since Investments of the bank in its Associates are participative 
in nature and the Bank having the power to exercise significant 
influence on their activities, such Investments are recognized in the 
Consolidated Financial Statements of the Bank.

(Previous year: Since Investments of the bank in its Associates are 
participative in nature and the Bank having the power to exercise 
significant influence on their activities, such Investments are 
recognized in the Consolidated Financial Statements of the Bank).

**15.	 l)	
Accounting Standard 24 – Discontinuing operations**

During the period from 01.04.2023 to 31.03.2024, the bank has not 
discontinued operations of any of its branches, which resulted in 
shedding of liability and realization of assets and no decision has 
been finalized to discontinue an operation in its entirety which have 
the above effect.

(Previous year: During the period from 01.04.2022 to 31.03.2023, 
the bank has not discontinued operations of any of its branches, 
which resulted in shedding of liability and realization of assets and 
no decision has been finalized to discontinue an operation in its 
entirety which have the above effect).

**15-	ds½ ys[kk ekud 23% lesfdr foR‍rh; fooj.kksa esa lg;ksxh  
	
	
laLFkkvksa esa fuos'kksa ds fy, ys[kkadu**

**15-	,y½  ys[kk ekud 24 & ifjpkyu can gksuk**

----

**15.	 m)	 Accounting Standard 26 – Intangible asset**

**Particulars
Useful life  
(No. of Years)
Amortization 
rates used
Amortization 
Method**

Software
03
33.33%
Straight Line Method

**Intangible Assets**

(Amount in ₹ Crores)

Particulars

Gross Block
Amortization
Net Block

As at 01.04.2023

Additions

Other  
Adjustments

Reclassifications / 
Deletions

As at 31.03.2024

As at 01.04.2023

For the year

Reclassifications / 
Deletions

As at 31.03.2024

As at 31.03.2024

As at 31.03.2023

Software
1251.33
117.90
0.79
0.00
1368.44
1066.88
98.38
0.79
1164.46
203.98
184.45

Other 
if any, 
please 
specify

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

TOTAL
1251.33
117.90
0.79
0.00
1368.44
1066.88
98.38
0.79
1164.46
203.98
184.45

FY 2022-
23
1209.31
42.01
0.00
0.00
1251.33
920.08
146.80
0.00
1066.88
184.45
NA

**15.	 n)	 Accounting Standard 28 – Impairment of assets**

**A substantial portion of the bank’s assets comprises ‘financial 
assets’ to which Accounting Standard 28 ‘Impairment of Assets’ is 
not Applicable. In the opinion of the bank, there is no impairment of 
its assets (to which the standard applies) to any material extent as 
at 31.03.2024 requiring recognition in terms of the said standard.**

**(Previous year: A substantial portion of the bank’s assets comprises 
‘financial assets’ to which Accounting Standard 28 ‘Impairment of 
Assets’ is Not Applicable. In the opinion of the bank, there is no 
impairment of its assets (to which the standard applies) to any 
material extent as at 31.03.2023 requiring recognition in terms of 
the said standard).**

**15.	 o)	 Accounting Standard 29 - Provisions, Contingent 
Liabilities and Contingent Assets**

**i)	
Movement of provisions for liabilities***

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Particulars
Salary 
arrears
Legal cases/ 
contingencies**

Opening Balance
459.51
85.58

(0.00)
(83.51)

Addition / Provided during 
the Year
1779.10
43.30

(459.51)
(4.98)

Amounts used/ Reversed 
during the Year
2088.61
9.23

(0.00)
(2.91)

**Balance as at 31.03.2024
150.00
119.65**

**(459.51)
(85.58)**

Timing of outflow/uncertainties

On actual 
Payment
Outflow on settlement 
/ crystallization

(On actual 
Payment)
(Outflow on settlement 
/ crystallization)

*Excluding provisions for others

**15-	,e½  ys[kk ekud 26 & vewrZ vkfLr**

l‚¶+Vos;j
03
33.33%
lhèkh js[kk fofèk

fooj.k

dqy Cy‚d
ifj'kksèku
usV Cy‚d

01-04-2023 rd

ifjoèkZu 

vU; lek;kstu

iquoZxÊdj.k@gVkuk

31-03-2024 rd

01-04-2023 rd

o"kZ ds fy,

iquoZxÊdj.k@gVkuk

31-03-2024 rd

31-03-2024 rd

31-03-2023 rd

l‚¶+Vos;j
1251.33
117.90
0.79
0.00
1368.44
1066.88
98.38
0.79
1164.46
203.98
184.45

vU; ;fn 
dksÃ gks 
rks —i;k 
mYys[k 
djsa

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

dqy
1251.33
117.90
0.79
0.00
1368.44
1066.88
98.38
0.79
1164.46
203.98
184.45

xr foÙk 
o"kZ 2022-
23

1209.31
42.01
0.00
0.00
1251.33
920.08
146.80
0.00
1066.88
184.45
NA

**15-	,u½  ys[kk ekud 28 & vkfLr;ksa dk ºzkl**

**fooj.k
osru cdk;k
dkuwuh ekeys@
vkdfLedrk,a**

1779.10
43.30
(459.51)
(4.98)

**vofèk ds nkSjku ç;qä@fjolZ 
jkf'k;ka**

2088.61
9.23
(0.00)
(2.91)

**31-03-2024 rd 'ks"k 
150.00
119.65
(459.51)
(85.58)**

**cfgokZg@vfuf'prrkvksa dk 
le;**

----

**ii)	
Refer Schedule-12 on contingent liabilities**

**Such liabilities at S.No.(I), (II), (III), (IV), (V) & (VI) are dependent 
upon the outcome of Court / arbitration / out of court settlement, 
disposal of appeals, the amount being called up, terms of 
contractual obligations, devolvement and raising of demand by 
concerned parties, respectively.**

**Other Disclosures:**

**16.	 Bank’s Disclosure in respect of Credit Exposures where 
the same had exceeded the Prudential Exposure limits as 
per Large Exposure (LE) framework prescribed by RBI for 
Individual/Group Borrowers for the Financial year ended 
31.03.2024:**

**Details of accounts where Bank has exceeded prudential exposure 
ceilings as per Large Exposure (LE) framework in respect of 
any Individual and Group Accounts based on Tier – 1 Capital of  
₹89617.67 Crores for the financial year ended 31.03.2024 are as 
below:-**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

S. 
No.
Name of the 
Borrower
Prescribed 
Ceiling
Exposure 
(as on 
31.03.2024)

Total 
Exposure as 
% of Tier-1 
Capital 
as on 
31.03.2024

Outstanding 
(as on 
31.03.2024)

Total 
Outstanding 
Exposure as per 
LE Framework 
as % of Tier – 1 
Capital as on 
31.03.2024

Individual

1.
Small 
Industries 
Development 
Bank of India

₹17923.53 
Crores (20% 
of Tier – I 
Capital)

20785.63
23.19%*
20535.62
22.91%*

*Group

NIL

**(FY ended 31.03.2023)**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

S. 
No.
Name of the 
Borrower
Prescribed 
Ceiling
Exposure 
(as on 
31.03.2023)

Total 
Exposure as 
% of Tier-1 
Capital 
as on 
31.03.2023

Outstanding 
(as on 
31.03.2023)

Total 
Outstanding 
Exposure as per 
LE Framework 
as % of Tier – 1 
Capital as on 
31.03.2023

Individual

1.
Small 
Industries 
Development 
Bank of India

₹12149.56 
Crores (20% 
of Tier – I 
Capital)

12735.80
20.97%
12686.13
$20.88%

*Group

NIL

RBI Circular dated 03.06.2019 has given leverage of 5% over and above the ceiling 
of 20% of single counterparty under the Bank’s Board Power. Board in its meeting 
dated 28.03.2017 has approved that bank may in exceptional circumstances 
consider enhancement of the exposure ceiling for single counterparty classified 
as Large Exposure up to 5% over and above ceiling of 20%.

* The same was approved by the Board in its meeting dated 16.11.2023.

$The same was approved by the Board in its meeting dated 04.06.2022.

**ii½	 vkdfLed ns;rkvksa ij vuqlwph&12 ns[ksa**

**vU; çdVhdj.k%**

31-03-2024 
dks fV;j&1 
iwath ds 

% ds :i 
esa dqy 
,Dlikst+j

cdk;k  
¼31-03-2024 
dks½

31-03-2024 dks 
Vh;j&1 iwath 
ds % ds :i 
esa ,yÃ ÝseodZ 
ds vuqlkj dqy 
cdk;k ,Dlikstj
O;fäxr

1.
Hkkjrh; 
y?kq m|ksx 
fodkl 
cSad	

`17923-
53 djksM+ 
¼fV;j&I 
iwath dk 
20%½

20785.63
23.19%*
20535.62
22.91%*

***lewg
'kwU;**

31-03-2023 
dks fV;j&1 
iwath ds 

% ds :i 
esa dqy 
,Dlikst+j

cdk;k  
¼31-03-
2024 
dks½

31-03-2023 dks 
Vh;j&1 iwath 
ds % ds :i 
esa ,yÃ ÝseodZ 
ds vuqlkj 
dqy cdk;k 
,Dlikstj
O;fäxr

1.
Hkkjrh; 
y?kq m|ksx 
fodkl 
cSad	

`12149-56 
djksM+ ¼fV;j&I 
iwath dk 
20%½

12735.80
20.97%
12686.13
$20.88%

----

All the exposure (other than exempted exposure) of Individual and Group 

Accounts for the year ended 31.03.2024 are within the prescribed regulatory 

limits, as per LE Framework.

(Previous year- All the exposure (other than exempted exposure) of 

Individual and Group Accounts (except as mentioned above) for the financial 

year ended 31.03.2023 are within the prescribed regulatory limits, as per LE 

Framework.).

17.	 Disclosure: Letter of Comfort (LoC)

a.	
Regarding RRBs:

	
As on 31.03.2024, PNB (as a Sponsor Bank) has issued 
Letters of Comfort in favour of Micro Units Development & 
Refinance Agency Limited (MUDRA Ltd.) on behalf of Assam 
Gramin Vikash Bank (AGVB) and Manipur Rural Bank (MRB) 
for enabling these Sponsored RRBs to become Member 
Lending Institutions (MLIs) for MUDRA Loans. 

	
On the basis of financials of the above RRBs for FY 2023 
and Letter of Comfort issued by us, MUDRA worked out the 
exposure limits for AGVB and MRB and these RRBs were 
accepted as MLI up to the exposure limit under MUDRA for 
Rs. 56.79 Crore and Rs. 1.92 Crore respectively. Further, 
the banks AGVB and MRB have not availed any refinance 
from MUDRA as on 31.03.2024. Hence, there is no financial 
impact.

b.	
Regarding Subsidiaries and other Associates:

	
The Bank has issued a Letter of Comfort to Prudential 
Regulation Authority (PRA), the regulator in United Kingdom, 
committing that the bank shall provide financial support to its 
subsidiary, Punjab National Bank (International) Ltd., UK so 
that it meets its financial commitments as and when they fall 
due.

	
The said Letter of Comfort has been renewed on 15.03.2022 
after seeking approval of our Board in favor of PRA w.r.t. 
our subsidiary PNBIL wherein we have reiterated our 
commitment. The renewal was done as per instruction of PRA 
and RBI. Further, Annual assessment of impact of LOC was 
approved by the Board in its meeting held on 28.03.2024, as 
per which the Bank does not foresee any crystallization of 
financial obligation. Therefore, there is no financial impact on 
account of this LOC for FY 2023-24.

	
Apart from the above, the Bank has not issued any Letter of 
Comfort to Group Entities (subsidiaries and associates).

18.	 Disclosure: Letter of Undertaking- 

The Bank has provided a Letter of Undertaking for PNB IBU Gift 
City Branch under Regulation 3(3) of International Financial Service 
Centre Authority(IFSCA) that: 

“Bank will provide support and assistance (including liquidity, 
whenever needed) and as may be appropriate to enable the 
banking unit to meet its obligations in the course of its obligation”.

----

Apart from the above the Bank has not issued any Letter of Comfort 
for overseas branches and there are no cumulative financial 
obligations under Letter of Comfort.

**19.	 Reward Points of Credit Card –**

PNB Credit Card holders are rewarded as and when they make 
purchases through usage of Credit Card. Reward Points are 
generated at the time of usage of Credit Card by Cardholder at 
merchant Establishment. Card holder can redeem the accumulated 
reward points. The amount payable on account of reward points 
is charged to Profit and Loss account and credited to Sundry 
Provision Account on daily basis.

**Position of outstanding reward points of Credit Cards and 
Provision thereon:**

Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year

Balance Reward Points outstanding
430866133
225980457

Provision held for these points (₹ in 
Crore)*
5.39
2.82

*The provision held against Rewards points in respect of Credit Cards has 
been worked out at ₹0.50 for 1 point. As per latest actuary report on Trend 
Analysis of credit card rewards points redemption provision has been made 
@25% of accumulated Reward points.

**20.	 Disclosure related to Non -Banking assets:**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

Current Year
Previous Year

No. of 
Properties
Balance 
Outstanding
No. of Properties
Balance 
Outstanding

12
26.45
12
26.45

21.	 Corporate debt securities lent or acquired under repo or 
reverse repo transactions:

**Current Year
Previous Year**

NIL
NIL

22.	 As per RBI guidelines, the Bank worked out the amount of 
Inter Branch Credit entries outstanding for more than 5 years 
to create a Blocked Account. Accordingly, a sum of ₹ Nil 
Crores (previous year ₹ Nil Crores)  [net of adjustments since 
carried out has been included under “Other Liabilities-others” 
in Schedule-5].

23.	 Premises includes 10 properties amounting to ₹3.72Crore 
(cost) & depreciation amount to Rs. 2.34 Crore are awaiting 
registration of title deeds. 

	
Previous year: Premises includes properties amounting to 
₹3.72Crore (cost) & depreciation amount to Rs. 2.27 Crore are 
awaiting registration of title deeds.

fooj.k
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ
cdk;k 'ks"k fjokMZ IokbaV
430866133
225980457

5.39
2.82

**pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ
laifÙk;ksa dh 
la[;k
cdk;k 'ks"k
laifÙk;ksa dh 
la[;k
cdk;k 'ks"k**

12
26.45
12
26.45

**pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ
'kwU;
'kwU;**

----

24.	 Premises includes Capital work in progress of ₹115.23 Crore 
as on 31.03.2024 (in the previous year as on 31.03.2023, 
₹42.37 Crore).

25.	 Guidelines given in Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development Act 2006 have been complied with for  
purchases made during the year ended March 2024  
(FY 2023-24) and payments have been made to the Vendors 
in time as per Act. Since there had been no delay in payment,  
no penal interest applicable during year ended March, 2024 
(FY 2023-24)

26.	 Depreciation on Revalued Portion of Premises for the current 
financial year ended March, 2024 is ₹167.79 Crores (Previous 
year ended March, 2023 ₹166.92 Crores).

27.	 During the Financial Year ended 31.03.2024 the Bank has not 
Revalued Immovable Properties (forming part of Schedule -10). 
(In the Previous financial year 2022-23 the Bank has revalued 
Immovable Properties, based on the reports obtained from the 
external independent valuers. The revaluation surplus amount 
to Rs. 1756.82 crore is credited to the revaluation reserves).

28.	 In compliance of RBI letter no. BPC.7201/21.04.132/2017-
18 dated 08.02.2018, Bank has made a provision of ₹87.59 
Crore (Previous year ₹93.58 Crore) being 5 % of the existing 
outstanding of ₹1751.93 Crore (Previous year ₹1871.68 
Crore) as on 31.03.2024 in respect of Advance to Government 
of Punjab Long term Loan (LTL).

29.	 As per RBI Letter no. DBR.No.BP.15199/21.04.048/2016-17 
dated June 23, 2017 (RBI List-1) and Letter no. DBR.
BP.1908/21.04.048/2017-18 dated August 28, 2017 (RBI 
List-2) for the accounts under the provisions of Insolvency & 
Bankruptcy Code (IBC), where the Bank is having exposure, the 
Bank is holding total provision of Rs.7991.75 Crore (Aggregate 
provision for RBI List 1 and List 2 accounts is 100%) as on 
March 31, 2024. (Previous Year ₹9297.46 Crore (Aggregate 
provision of RBI List 1 and List 2 accounts), 100.00% of Gross 
NPA advances).

30.	 The Board of Directors has recommended a dividend of 
Rs.1.50 per equity share (75.00%) for the year ended March 
31, 2024 subject to requisite approvals.

31.	 In 
terms 
of 
RBI 
Circular 
no. 
DOR.ACC.REC.
No.91/21.04.018/2022-23 dated 13.12.2022, the disclosure 
relating to item under the subhead ‘Miscellaneous  Income’ 
under the head ‘Schedule 14 - Other Income’ exceeding one 
percent of total income, is as under: 

----

(Amount in ₹ Crore) 

Items under the Sub-head
Current Year
Previous Year

Realisation in written off A/Cs
6100.58
6508.05

ATM / Kiosk Charges
Not exceeding 1%
984.73

•	
There is no item under ‘Other expenditure’ in schedule 16: 
Operating Expenses that exceeds 1% of total income.

•	
There is no item under ‘Others (including provisions)’ in 
schedule 5: Other Liabilities and Provisions that exceeds 
1% of total assets.

•	
There is no item under ‘Others’ in schedule 11: Other 
Assets that exceeds 1% of total assets.

32.	 I.	 Figures of the previous periods have been regrouped / 
rearranged / reclassified wherever necessary to conform to 
current period’s classification.

	
II.	 Figures in the bracket wherever given relates to previous 
year.

¼jkf'k ₹ djksM+ esa½

**mi&'kh"kZ ds varxZr ensa
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

cês [kkrs esa Mkys x, [kkrksa esa olwyh
6100.58
6508.05

,Vh,e@fd;ksLd çHkkj
1% ls vfèkd ugÈ
984.73

----

**31 ekpZ 2024 dks lekIr o"kZ ds fy, ,dy udnh izokg dk fooj.k
STATEMENT OF STANDALONE CASH FLOW FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 31, 2024**


¼Rs.000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gSa½ (Rs.000’s omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 
dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 
31.03.2024**

31.03.2023 
dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended  
31.03.2023 
,-
A.
ifjpkyu dk;Zdykiksa ls udnh izokg
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
dj ds i”pkr fuoy ykHk@gkfu
Net Profit/ (Loss) after Tax
8244,61,55
2507,20,49

dj ds fy, izko/kku
Provision for Tax
4949,58,97
1781,06,01

**(I)
dj ls iwoZ fuoy ykHk
Net Profit/ (Loss) before tax
(i)
13194,20,52
4288,26,50**

(II)
fuEufyf[kr ds fy, lek;kstu%
Adjustments for:
vpy vkfLr;ksa ij ewY;gzkl
Depreciation on Fixed Assets
895,24,94
896,55,51

fuos”k [fuoy] ij ewY;gzkl@¼foekspu½
Depreciation/(Release) and Provision on Investments (Net]
-742,11,83
2356,68,36

vutZd vkfLr;ksa ds fy, izko/kku
Provisions for Non Performing Assets
12345,01,25
15902,81,81

ekud vkfLr;ksa ij izko/kku
Provision on Standard Assets
87,19,80
1304,12,53

vU; izko/kku ¼fuoy½
Other Provision (net)
711,72,66
860,32,69

vuq’kaxh@vU; ls ykHkka”k
Dividend from Subsidiary / Others
-33,44,99
-84,36,66

lgk;d daifu;ksa@la;qä m|eksa@lg;ksfx;ksa esa fuos'k ls vk;
Income from investment in Subsidiaries/Joint Ventures/Associates
-137,39,47
0

ckW.Mksa ij iznÙk C;kt
Interest paid on Bonds
2956,57,66
2414,99,31

**mi&tksM+
Sub Total
(ii)
16076,12,72
23648,57,97**

(III)
fuEufyf[kr ds fy, lek;kstu%
Adjustment for :
fuos”kksa esa gzkl@¼o`f)½
Decrease / (Increase) in Investments
-22810,50,39
-25575,80,06

vfxzeksa esa gzkl@¼o`f)½
Decrease / (Increase) in Advances
-115941,62,37
-117522,17,41

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 
dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 
31.03.2024**

tek jkf”k;ksa esa o`f)@¼gzkl½
Increase / (Decrease) in Deposits
88549,70,10
134944,65,49

m/kkjksa esa o`f)@¼gzkl½
Increase / (Decrease) in Borrowings
-7963,87,73
1126,32,15

vU; ns;rkvksa o izko/kkuksa esa o`f)@¼gzkl½
Increase / (Decrease) in Other Liabilities & Provisions
3960,04,63
-72,86,37

**mi&tksM+
Sub Total
(iii)
-55340,32,01
-4984,67,61**

**ifjpkyuksa ls mRiUu udnh
Cash generated from Operations
(i+ii+iii)
-26069,98,77
22952,16,87**

izR;{k dj ¼izfrsn; dks ?kVkdj½
Direct Taxes paid (net off refund)
-1824,61,17
-1172,19,62

**¼,½
(A)
fuos’k dk;Zdykiksa esa ¼iz;qDr½ fuoy udnh
Net Cash from/(used) Operating Activities
¼,½
(A)
-27894,59,94
21779,97,25**

vuq’kaxh@vU; ls ykHkka”k dh olwyh
Dividend recd from Subsidiary/Others
33,44,99
84,36,66

vuq’kaxh@vU; esa fuos”k ¼fuoy½
Investment in Subsidiary/Others (net)
-435,68,49
-232,79,64

**fuos’k dk;Zdykiksa esa ¼iz;qDr½ fuoy udnh
Net Cash from/(used) in Investing Activities
¼ch½
(B)
-1539,33,54
-682,23,91**

ckW.Mksa ¼fuoy½ dk fuxZe/k@¼ekspu½
Issue/(Redemption) of Bonds (net)
7102,00,00
4484,00,00

ckW.Mksa ij iznÙk C;kt
Interest paid on Bonds
-2956,57,66
-2414,99,31

ykHkka'k fn;k
Dividend paid
-715,71,60
-704,70,50

**foÙkiks"k.k dk;Zdykiksa ls fuoy udnh
Net Cash from Financing Activities
¼lh½
(C)
3429,70,74
1364,30,19**

----

¼#-000 dks NksM+ fn;k x;k gS½ (Rs.  000's omitted)

**izcq) ’kekZ
Prabudh Sharma
lgk;d egkizca/kd
Asstt. General Manager**

**eqds’k dqekj
Mukesh Kumar     
lgk;d egkizca/kd
Asstt. General Manager**

**vkj ds [khph
R K Khichi 
mi egkizca/kd
Deputy General Manager**

**izoh.k dqekj ’kekZ
Praveen Kumar Sharma
egkizca/kd
General Manager**

**Mh ds tSu
D K Jain
eq[; egkizca/kd vkSj lh,Qvks
Chief General Manager & CFO**

**fcHkq izlkn egkik=
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra 
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**,e ijef’koe
M Paramasivam  
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**fcuksn dqekj
Binod Kumar
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**dY;k.k dqekj
Kalyan Kumar
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**fooj.k
Particulars
31.03.2024 
dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 
31.03.2024**

cSadksa ds ikl “ks’k vkSj ekax o vYi lwpuk ij ns; /ku
Balances with Banks & Money at Call & Short Notice
76932,23,31
46910,65,64

cSadksa ds ikl “ks’k vkSj ekax o vYi lwpuk ij ns; /ku
Balances with Banks & Money at Call & Short Notice
64071,66,93
76932,23,31

**129104,58,09
155108,80,83**

	
	
	
	

	
fVIif.k;k¡

	
Cash flow statement has been prepared under the Indirect Method and figures have been regrouped wherever considered necessary.	

	
Cash and Cash equivalents includes Cash on hand, Balance with RBI & Other Banks and Money at Call and Short Notice.

----

**vrqy dqekj xks;y
Atul Kumar Goel
izca/k funs’kd ,oa eq[; dk;Zikyd vf/kdkjh
Managing Director & CEO**

**ds th vuarÑ".ku
K G Ananthakrishnan
v/;{k
Chairman**

**MkW- js[kk tSu
Dr. Rekha Jain
funs'kd
Director**

**latho dqekj fla?ky
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
funs'kd
Director**

**iadt tks’kh
Pankaj Joshi
funs'kd
Director**

**mek ’kadj
Uma Sankar
funs'kd
Director**

**iadt ’kekZ
Pankaj Sharma
funs'kd
Director**

**Ñrs Mh ds NktM+ ,aM dks-
For D K Chhajer & Co. 
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 304138bZ
FRN: 304138E**

**Ñrs ,l lh ciuk ,aM ,’kksfl,’ku 
For S C Bapna & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 115649MCY;w
FRN: 115649W**

**Ñrs mesn tSu ,aM dks
For Ummed Jain & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 119250MCY;w
FRN: 119250W**

**lunh ys[kkdj fd’kksj ljkZQ
CA Nand Kishore Sarraf 
Hkkxhnkj
Partner  
(M.No. 510708)**

**lunh ys[kkdkj t; izdk’k xqIrk
CA Jai Prakash Gupta 
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
(M.No. 088903)**

**lunh ys[kkdkj fnus’k xksfndk
CA Dinesh Godika
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
(M.No. 072738)**

**Ñrs ,u ds HkkxZo ,aM dks-
For N K Bhargava & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants  
 FRN:  000429N**

**Ñrs ih ,l Mh ,aM ,’kksfl,’ku
For P S D & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
 FRN: 004501C**

**lunh ys[kkdkj ,u ds HkkxZo
CA N K Bhargava   
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
(M.No.080624)**

**lunh ys[kkdkj vfHkuo 'kekZ
CA Abhinav Sharma  
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
 (M.No. 411219)**

**LFkku% ubZ fnYyh
Place: New Delhi
fnukad% 9 ebZ] 2024
Date: May 09, 2024**

----

420

**BLANK PAGE**

----

ANNUAL
REPORT

**Consolidated 
Financial Statements**

समेɾकत ɾवŨीय ɾववरण

----

**ys[kkijh{kdksa dh Lora= fjiksVZ**

**iatkc uS'kuy cSad ds lnL;ksa ds fy,**

**lesfdr foÙkh; foojf.k;ksa dh ys[kk&ijh{kk ij fjiksVZ**

**vfHker**

iii.	 01 leuq"kaxh vkSj 6 lgk;d daiuh ds vys[kkijhf{kr ys[ksA

**vfHker dk vkèkkj**

**INDEPENDENT AUDITORS’ REPORT**

**To,
The Members of Punjab National Bank**

**Report on Audit of the Consolidated Financial Statements**

**Opinion**

1.	
We have audited the attached Consolidated Financial 
Statements of Punjab National Bank (“the Bank”), its 
subsidiaries (the parent and its subsidiaries together 
referred to as (“the Group”), and associates as at 31 March 
2024, the Consolidated Profit and Loss Account and the 
Consolidated Cash Flow Statement for the year ended on 
that date and a summary of significant accounting policies 
and other explanatory information annexed thereto, in 
which the following are incorporated:

i.	
Audited Financial Statements of Punjab National 
Bank (the Bank), audited by us, vide our audit report 
dated 09 May 2024;

ii.	
Audited Financial Statements of 4 Subsidiary and 8 
Associates, audited by other auditors; and

iii.	
Unaudited accounts of 1 Subsidiary and 6 Associates.

2.	
In our opinion and to the best of our information and 
according to the explanations given to us and based on our 
consideration of the reports of other auditors on separate 
financial statements of subsidiaries and associates, the 
unaudited financial statements and the other financial 
information of subsidiaries/associates as furnished by 
the management the aforesaid consolidated financial 
statements give the information required by the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 (“the Act”) in the manner so required 
for bank and are in conformity with accounting principles 
generally accepted in India and :

a.	
the Consolidated Balance Sheet, read with the 
notes thereon is a full and fair view of Balance Sheet 
containing all the necessary particulars, is properly 
drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of the 
state of affairs of the Bank as at 31 March, 2024;

b.	
the Consolidated Profit and Loss Account, read with 
the notes thereon shows a true balance of profit; and

c.	
the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement gives a true 
and fair view of the cash flows for the year ended on 
that date.

**Basis for Opinion**

3.	
We conducted our audit in accordance with the Standards 
on Auditing (SAs) issued by the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of India (“the ICAI”). Our responsibilities under 
those Standards are further described in the Auditor’s 
Responsibilities for the Audit of the Consolidated Financial 

----

**eq[; ys[kk ijh{kk ekeys
ys[kk&ijh{kk esa gekjs ekeys dks 
fdl çdkj ls n'kkZ;k x;k gS**

**vfxze & oxÊdj.k ,oa 
çkoèkkuhdj.k**

Statements’ section of our report. We are independent of 
the Group in accordance with the code of ethics issued by 
the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India together with 
ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the 
Consolidated Financial Statements in India, and we have 
fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with 
these requirements and the code of ethics. We believe 
that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and 
appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.

**Key Audit Matters**

4.	
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional 
judgment, were of most significance in our audit of the 
Consolidated Financial Statements of the current period. 
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit 
of the Consolidated Financial Statements as a whole, and 
in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a 
separate opinion on these matters. We have determined 
the matters described below to be the key audit matters to 
be communicated in our report.

**Key Audit Matters
How our matter was 
addressed in the audit**

**Advances – classification 
and provisioning**

(Refer Schedule 9. to the 
Consolidated 
Financial 
Statements, read with the 
Accounting Policy No 5)

The advances are classified 
as 
performing 
and 
non-
performing advances (NPA) 
and provisioning thereon is 
made in accordance with 
the 
prudential 
norms 
as 
prescribed by the Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI). The 
Bank 
has 
implemented 
complete 
system 
driven 
recognition of advances and 
their classification in SASCL 
Application 
under 
Core 
Banking 
Solution 
(CBS). 
The extent of provisioning 
of NPA under the prudential 
norms are mainly based on 
its ageing and recoverability 
of the underlined security. 
The same are also reviewed 
manually based on necessity.

Our audit approach included 
an 
understanding 
of 
the 
Bank’s software, circulars, 
guidelines 
and 
directives 
of 
the 
Reserve 
Bank 
of India and the Bank’s 
internal 
instructions 
and 
procedures in respect of the 
assets classification and its 
provisioning and adopted the 
following audit procedures:

	•
Evaluated 
and 

understood the Bank’s 
internal control system in 
adhering to the Relevant 
RBI guidelines regarding 
income 
recognition, 
asset classification and 
provisioning pertaining to 
advances.

	•
Test checked the design 
and 
implementation 
as well as operational 
effectiveness of relevant 
internal 
controls 
and 
substantive 
testing, 
including involvement of 
manual process in relation 
to 
income 
recognition, 
asset classification and 
provisioning pertaining to 
advances.

----

In the event of any improper 
application of the prudential 
norms or consideration of 
the incorrect value of the 
security, as the valuation of 
the security involves high 
degree of estimation and 
judgement, 
the 
carrying 
value of the advances could 
be 
materially 
misstated 
either 
individually 
or 
collectively, and in view of the 
significance of the amount of 
advances in the Standalone 
Financial 
Statements 
the 
classification of the advances 
and provisioning thereon has 
been considered as Key 
Audit Matter in our audit.

	•
Reviewed 
the 
Bank’s 
monitoring 
mechanisms 
to identify errors and 
omission 
in 
applying/ 
implementation of logic 
/ data integrity and its 
corrective action.

	•
Reviewed 
the 

d o c u m e n t a t i o n s , 
operations / performance 
and monitoring of the 
advance 
accounts, 
on 
as per RBI guidelines 
basis of the large and 
stressed 
advances, 
to 
ascertain any overdue, 
unsatisfactory conduct or 
weakness in any advance 
account, 
examination 
of classification as per 
prudential 
norms 
of 
the RBI, in respect of 
the branches / relevant 
divisions audited by us. 
In respect of the branches 
audited by the branch 
statutory 
auditors, 
we 
have placed reliance on 
their reports. 

	•
Reviewed the report of 
independent IT Expert 
on 
review 
of 
SASCL 
Application 
(Income 
Recognition and Asset 
Classification 
solution) 
used by CBS including 
the review of “Baseline 
Requirements for the NPA 
classification Solution”.

	•
Reviewed on test check 
basis the reports of the 
credit audit, inspection 
audit, risk based internal 
audit, concurrent audit, 
regulatory 
audit 
to 
ascertain the advances 
having 
any 
adverse 
features 
/ 
comments, 
and reviewed the reports 
generated 
from 
the 
Bank’s system.

----

**gekjk ifj.kke%**

**ysunsu ds egRo dks ns[krs gq, 
gekjh ys[kk ijh{kk çfØ;k ds  
ifj.kke mfpr vkSj larks"ktud 
ik, x,A**

**gekjk ifj.kke%**

**ysunsu ds egRo dks ns[krs gq, 
gekjh ys[kk ijh{kk  çfØ;k ds 
ifj.kke mfpr vkSj larks"ktud 
ik, x,A**

**Our Results:**

The results of our audit 
process were observed to 
be adequate and satisfactory 
considering the materiality of 
the transactions.

Investments – valuation, 
and 
identification 
and 
provisioning 
for 
Non-
Performing Investments 

(Refer Schedule 8 to the 
Consolidated 
Financial 
Statements, read with the 
Accounting Policy No 4)

Investment 
portfolio 
of 
the 
bank 
comprises 
of 
Investments in Government 
Securities, 
Bonds, 
Debentures, 
Shares, 
Security Receipts and other 
Approved Securities which 
are classified under three 
categories, Held to Maturity, 
Available for Sale and Held 
for Trade. 

Valuation 
of 
Investments, 
identification 
of 
Non 
performing 
Investments 
(NPI) and the corresponding 
non-recognition of income 
and provision thereon, is 
carried out in accordance 
with the relevant circulars 
/ guidelines / directions of 
RBI. The valuation of each 
category (type) of aforesaid 
security is to be carried out 
as 
per 
the 
methodology 
prescribed in circulars and 
directives issued by the RBI 
which 
involves 
collection 
of data/ information from 
various sources such as FBIL 
rates, rates quoted on BSE/
NSE, financial statements 
of unlisted companies, NAV 
in case of mutual funds & 
security receipts etc. Certain 
investments are based on 
the valuation methodologies 
that include statistical models 
with inherent 

Our audit approach towards 
Investments with reference 
to 
the 
RBI 
circulars 
/ 
directives included the review 
and testing of the design, 
implementation, 
operating 
effectiveness 
of 
internal 
controls and audit procedures 
in 
relation 
to 
valuation, 
classification, identification of 
Non-Performing Investments, 
provisioning / depreciation 
related to Investments as per 
RBI guidelines.

	•
We 
reviewed 
and 
evaluated 
the 
process 
adopted for collection of 
information from various 
sources for determining 
fair 
value 
of 
these 
investments.

	•
	For selected sample of 
investments (covering all 
categories of investments 
based 
on 
nature 
of 
security) 
we 
tested 
accuracy and compliance 
with 
the 
RBI 
Master 
circulars and directions. 

	•
	We 
assessed 
and 
evaluated the process of 
identification of NPIs, and 
corresponding reversal of 
income and creation of 
provision.

Our Results:
The results of our audit 
process were observed to 
be adequate and satisfactory 
considering the materiality.

----

**lwpuk çkS|ksfxdh ¼vkbZVh½ dk 
vkdyu%**

**gekjs ys[kkijh{kk –f"Vdks.k esa 
fuEufyf[kr 'kkfey gSa% &**

assumptions, 
assessment 
of price for valuation based 
on financial statements etc. 
Hence, the price discovered 
for the valuation of these 
Investments may not be 
the true representative but 
only a fair assessment of 
the Investments as on date. 
Hence 
the 
valuation 
of 
Investments requires special 
attention and further in view 
of the significance of the 
amount of Investments in 
the financial statements the 
same has been considered as 
Key Audit Matter in our audit.

**Assessment of Information 
Technology (IT):**

IT controls with respect to 
recording 
of 
transactions, 
generating various reports 
in 
compliance 
with 
RBI 
guidelines including IRAC 
norms.

Other 
compliances 
to 
regulators 
etc., 
is 
an 
important part of the process. 
Such 
reporting 
is 
highly 
dependent on the effective 
working of Core Banking 
Software and other allied 
systems.

We have considered this 
as key audit matter as any 
control 
lapses, 
validation 
failures, incorrect input data 
and wrong extraction of data 
may result in wrong reporting 
of data to the management 
and regulators.

Our audit approach included: -

	•
Understanding 
the 
coding system adopted 
by the Bank for various 
categories of customers.

	•
Reviewed 
the 
design, 
implementation 
and 
operating 
effectiveness 
of the Bank’s IT controls 
including 
application, 
access 
controls 
that 
are critical to financial 
reporting on test check 
basis.

	•
Understanding 
the 
feeding of the data in 
the system and going 
through the extraction of 
the financial information 
and statements from the 
IT system existing in the 
Bank.

	•
Checking of the user 
requirements 
for 
any 
changes 
in 
the 
regulations/ policy of the 
Bank.

	•
Reviewed 
the 
reports 
generated by the system 
on sample basis.

	•
Reviewed the report of 
independent IT Expert 
on 
review 
of 
SASCL 
Application (Income 

----

**gekjk ifj.kke%**

**eqdnesckth vkSj vkdfLed 
ns;rk,¡**

**gekjs ys[kkijh{kk –f"Vdks.k esa 
fuEu 'kkfey jgs%&**

**•
	tgka Hkh vko';drk gqbZ] 
dkuwuh vkSj dj lykgdkjksa 
dh jk; dk lgkjk fy;k x;k 
gSA**

	
Recognition and Asset 
Classification 
solution) 
used by CBS including 
the review of “Baseline 
Requirements for the NPA 
classification Solution”.

**Our Results:**

There is continuous progress, 
still the system needs to be 
strengthened for its efficacy 
to control deficiencies of 
input/output data from the 
system.

**Litigation 
& 
Contingent 
Liabilities**

Assessment of Contingent 
liabilities in respect of certain 
litigations including Direct 
and 
Indirect 
Taxes 
and 
various other claims filed by 
other parties upon the Bank 
not acknowledged as debts.

The Bank’s assessment is 
supported by the facts of 
matter, their own judgment, 
past experience, and advice 
from legal and independent 
tax 
consultants 
wherever 
considered necessary. 

Accordingly, 
unexpected 
adverse 
outcomes 
may 
significantly 
impact 
the 
Bank’s reported profit and 
the Balance Sheet.

We determined the above 
area as a Key Audit Matter 
in 
view 
of 
associated 
uncertainty relating to the 
outcome of litigations which 
requires 
application 
of 
judgment in interpretation of 
law.

Accordingly, our audit was 
focused on analysing the 
facts of subject matter under 
consideration and judgments/ 
interpretation of law involved.

**Our 
audit 
approach 
included: -**

	•
Going through the current 
status of the tax litigations 
and contingent liabilities;

	•
Examining 
the 
orders 
and/or 
communication 
received 
from 
various 
Tax Authorities/ Judicial 
forums and follow up 
action thereon;

	•
Evaluating 
the 
merits 
of the subject matter 
under consideration with 
reference to the grounds 
presented 
therein 
and 
available 
independent 
legal / tax advice; and

	•
Wherever 
required, 
reliance is placed on the 
opinion of legal and tax 
consultants.

----

**Information Other than the Financial Statements and 
Auditor’s Report thereon**

5.	
The Bank’s Board of Directors is responsible for the other 
information. The other information comprises the Directors’ 
Report, including annexures, Corporate Governance 
Report and other reports (but does not include the financial 
statements and our auditor’s report thereon). Our opinion 
on the Financial Statements does not cover the other 
information and we do not and will not express any form of 
assurance conclusion thereon.

	
In connection with our audit of the financial statements, our 
responsibility is to read the other information and, in doing 
so, consider whether the other information is materially 
inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge 
obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially 
misstated.

	
If, based on the work we have performed, we conclude that 
there is a material misstatement of this other information, 
we are required to report that fact. We have nothing to 
report in this regard.

**Responsibilities of Management and Those Charged with 
Governance for the Consolidated Financial Statements**

6.	
The Bank’s Board of Directors is responsible with respect 
to the preparation of these Consolidated Financial 
Statements that give a true and fair view of the financial 
position, financial performance and cash flows of the Bank 
in accordance with the accounting principles generally 
accepted in India, including the Accounting Standards 
issued by ICAI, and provisions of Section 29 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 and circulars and guidelines issued 
by the Reserve Bank of India (‘RBI’) from time to time. 
This responsibility also includes maintenance of adequate 
accounting records in accordance with the provisions of 
the Act for safeguarding of the assets of the Bank and for 
preventing and detecting frauds and other irregularities; 
selection and application of appropriate accounting 
policies; making judgments and estimates that are 
reasonable and prudent; and design, implementation and 
maintenance of adequate internal financial controls, that 
were operating effectively for ensuring the accuracy and 
completeness of the accounting records, relevant to the 
preparation and presentation of the financial statements 
that give a true and fair view and are free from material 
misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

	
In preparing the financial statements, management is 
responsible for assessing the Bank’s ability to continue 
as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters 
related to going concern and using the going concern 
basis of accounting unless management either intends 
to liquidate the Bank or to cease operations, or has no 
realistic alternative but to do so.

----

**lesfdr foÙkh; fooj.kksa dh ys[kkijh{kk gsrq ys[kk ijh{kdksa dk 
mÙkjnkf;Ro**

**Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Consolidated 
Financial Statements**

7.	
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about 
whether the consolidated financial statements as a whole 
are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud 
or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes 
our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of 
assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted 
in accordance with SAs will always detect a material 
misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from 
fraud or error and are considered material if, individually 
or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected 
to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the 
basis of these financial statements.

	
As part of an audit in accordance with SAs, we exercise 
professional 
judgment 
and 
maintain 
professional 
skepticism throughout the audit. We also:

	•
Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of 
the consolidated financial statements, whether due to fraud 
or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive 
to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient 
and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The 
risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting 
from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as 
fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, 
misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.

	•
Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to 
the audit in order to design audit procedures that are 
appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose 
of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Bank’s 
internal control on the consolidated financial statements.

	•
Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used 
and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and 
related disclosures made by management.

	•
Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of 
the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the 
audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty 
exists related to events or conditions that may cast 
significant doubt on the Bank’s ability to continue as a 
going concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty 
exists, we are required to draw attention in our auditor’s 
report to the related disclosures in the financial statements 
or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify our 
opinion. Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence 
obtained up to the date of our auditor’s report. However, 
future events or conditions may cause the bank to cease 
to continue as a going concern.

	•
Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content 
of the consolidated financial statements, including 
the disclosures, and whether the financial statements 
represent the underlying transactions and events in a 
manner that achieves fair presentation.

----

**vU; ekeys**

	•
Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the 
consolidated financial results/financial information of the 
entities within the Group and its associates to express 
an opinion on the consolidated financial statements. 
We are responsible for the direction, supervision and 
performance of the audit of financial information of such 
entities included in the consolidated financial statements 
of which we are the independent auditors. For the other 
entities included in the consolidated financial statements, 
which have been audited by other auditors, such other 
auditors remain responsible for the direction, supervision 
and performance of the audits carried out by them. We 
remain solely responsible for our audit opinion.

	
Materiality is the magnitude of the misstatements in 
the statements that, individually or aggregate, makes 
it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably 
knowledgeable user of the financial statements may 
be influenced. We consider quantitative materiality and 
qualitative factors in; (i) planning of the scope of our audit 
work and evaluating the results of our work; and (ii) to 
evaluate the effect of any identified misstatement in the 
financial statements.

	
We communicate with those charged with governance 
regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and 
timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including 
any significant deficiencies in internal control that we 
identify during our audit.

	
We also provide those charged with governance with 
a statement that we have complied with relevant 
ethical 
requirements 
regarding 
independence, 
and 
to communicate with them all relationships and other 
matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on our 
independence, and where applicable, related safeguards.

	
From the matters communicated with those charged with 
governance, we determine those matters that were of most 
significance in the audit of the financial statements of the 
current period and are therefore the key audit matters. We 
describe these matters in our auditor’s report unless law 
or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter 
or when, in extremely rare circumstances, we determine 
that a matter should not be communicated in our report 
because the adverse consequences of doing so would 
reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest 
benefits of such communication.

**Other Matter**

8.	
The accompanying consolidated financial statements 
includes the audited financial statements and other 
financial information, in respect of:

----

	•
Four (04) subsidiaries viz. (i) Druk PNB Bank Limited, 
(ii) PNB Gilts Limited, (iii) PNB Investment Services 
Limited and (iv) PNB Cards and Services Limited 
whose financial statements / financial information 
reflect total assets of Rs. 27,767.78 crore as at 31 
March 2024, total revenues of Rs.1,875.97 crore, and 
the Group’s share of total net profit/(loss) after tax 
of Rs.105.66 crore for the year ended on that date 
have been audited by its respective independent 
auditor whose reports have been furnished to us, and 
our opinion is based solely on the reports of the said 
auditors.

	•
Eight (8) domestic associates whose financial results/ 
statements include Group’s share of net profit after 
tax of Rs. 777.85 crore for the year ended 31 March 
2024 respectively, as considered in the consolidated 
financial statements whose financial results/financial 
statements, other financial information has been 
audited by their respective independent auditors 
whose audit reports have been furnished, and our 
opinion is based solely on the reports of the said 
auditors.

	•
The Consolidated Financial results of the Bank for the 
previous year ended 31st March, 2023 were audited 
by the joint auditors, three of them are predecessor 
audit firms and have expressed unmodified opinion 
on such financial results vide report dated May 19, 
2023.

9.	
The accompanying consolidated financial statements 
includes the unaudited financial results/statements and 
other unaudited financial information, in respect of: 

	•
One (01) subsidiary viz. (i) Punjab National Bank 
(International) Ltd. whose financial statements 
/ financial information reflect total assets of Rs. 
8,388.94 crores as at 31 March, 2024, total revenues 
of Rs. 532.53 crores and share of total net profit after 
tax of Rs. 89.19 crores for the year ended on that 
date have been furnished by the management of the 
Bank.

	•
One (01) foreign associate whose financial results/ 
statements include Group’s share of net profit/
(loss) after tax of Rs. 45.60 crores for the year 
ended 31 March 2024 respectively, as considered 
in the Consolidated Financial Statements whose 
financial results/financial statements, other financial 
information has been furnished by the management 
of the Bank.

----

**vU; lkafofèkd ,oa fu;ked vko';drkvksa ij fjiksVZ**

	•
Five (05) domestic associate whose financial results/ 
statements include Group’s share of net profit/(loss) 
after tax of Rs. 80.57 crores for the year ended 
31 March 2024 respectively, as considered in the 
Consolidated Financial Statements whose financial 
results/financial statements, other financial information 
has been furnished by the management of the Bank.

In our opinion and according to the information and explanations 
given to us by the Board of Directors, these financial statements/
financial results / financial information are not material to the 
Group.

Our opinion on the Statement is not modified in respect of the 
above matters.

**Report on Other Legal and Regulatory Requirements**

10.	 The Balance Sheet and the Profit and Loss Account have 
been drawn up in accordance with Section 29 of the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949;

11.	 Subject to the limitations of the audit indicated in paragraphs 
8 and 9 above and as required by the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980, 
and subject also to the limitations of disclosure required 
therein, we report that:

a.	
We have obtained all the information and explanations 
which, to the best of our knowledge and belief, were 
necessary for the purposes of our audit and have 
found them to be satisfactory;]

b.	
The transactions of the Bank, which have come to our 
notice, have been within the powers of the Bank;

c.	
The returns received from the offices and branches of 
the Bank have been found adequate for the purposes 
of our audit; and

d.	
We have not observed any financial transaction or 
matter which has adverse effect on the functioning of 
the bank.

12.	 As 
required 
by 
letter 
No. 
DOS.ARG.
No.6270/08.91.001/2019-20 dated March 17, 2020 on 
“Appointment of Statutory Central Auditors (SCAs) in 
Public Sector Banks – Reporting obligations for SCAs from 
FY 2019-20”, read with subsequent communication dated 
May 19, 2020 issued by the RBI, we further report on the 
matters specified in paragraph 2 of the aforesaid letter as 
under:

a.	
In our opinion, the aforesaid Consolidated Financial 
Statements comply with the applicable Accounting 
Standards issued by ICAI, to the extent they are not 
inconsistent with the accounting policies prescribed 
by the RBI.

----

**13-	 ge vkxs fjiksVZ djrs gSa fd%**

b.	
There are no observations or comments on financial 
transactions or matters which have any adverse 
effect on the functioning of the Bank.

c.	
As the Bank is not registered under the Companies 
Act, 2013 the disqualification from being a director of 
the bank under sub-section (2) of section 164 of the 
Companies Act, 2013 do not apply to the Bank.

d.	
There are no qualifications, reservations or adverse 
remarks relating to the maintenance of accounts and 
other matters connected therewith of the Bank. 

e.	
The Bank’s internal financial controls over financial 
reporting is not applicable on the Consolidated 
Financial Statement.

**13.	 We further report that:**

a.	
in our opinion, proper books of account as required by 
law have been kept by the Bank so far as it appears 
from our examination of those books and proper 
returns adequate for the purposes of our audit have 
been received from branches not visited by us;

b.	
the Balance Sheet, the Profit and Loss Account and 
the Cash Flow Statement dealt with by this report are 
in agreement with the books of account and with the 
returns received from the branches not visited by us;

c.	
 the reports on the accounts of the branch offices 
audited by branch auditors of the Bank under section 
29 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 have been 
sent to us and have been properly dealt with by us in 
preparing this report; and

d.	
In our opinion, the Balance Sheet, the Profit and Loss 
Account and the Cash Flow Statement comply with 
the applicable accounting standards, to the extent 
they are not inconsistent with the accounting policies 
prescribed by RBI.

**—rs Mh ds NktM+ ,aM daiuh
For D K Chhajer & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 304138bZ
FRN: 304138E**

**—rs ,l lh ckiuk ,aM ,lksfl,V~l 
For S C Bapna & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 115649MCY;w
FRN: 115649W**

**—rs mesn tSu ,aM daiuh
For Ummed Jain & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 119250MCY;w
FRN: 119250W**

----

LFkku% ubZ fnYyh 
Place: New Delhi
fnukad% 09 ebZ] 2024
Date: 09 May 2024

lunh ys[kkdkj ,u- ds- HkkxZo
CA N K Bhargava 
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
¼lnL; la- 080624½
(M. No. 080624)
;wMhvkbZ,u% 24080624BKEJVX8468
UDIN: 24080624BKEJVX8468

Ñrs ,u- ds- HkkxZo ,aM daiuh
For N K Bhargava & Co. 
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 000429,u
FRN: 000429N

—rs ih ,l Mh ,aM ,lksfl,V
For P S D & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 004501lh
FRN: 004501C

lunh ys[kkdkj uan fd'kksj ljkZQ
CA Nand Kishore Sarraf
Hkkxhnkj
Partner
¼lnL; la- 510708½
(M. No. 510708)
;wMhvkbZ,u% 24510708BKBMPA6841
UDIN: 24510708BKBMPA6841

lunh ys[kkdkj fnus'k xksfndk
CA Dinesh Godika
Hkkxhnkj 
Partner
¼lnL; la- 072738½
(M. No. 072738)
;wMhvkbZ,u% 24072738BKEGTQ9787
UDIN: 24072738BKEGTQ9787

----

**fooj.k 
Particulars
vuqlwph**

**Schedule
 31-03-2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
 31-03-2023 dks
 As on 31.03.2023**

**iwath vkSj ns;rk,**

**1**

**2**

**2A**

**3**

**4**

**5**

2202.20

108184.53

560.77

1379225.24

72585.62

35877.60

2202.20

100678.30

459.38

1290347.07

70148.62

29813.37
dqy  TOTAL
1598635.96
1493648.94

**6**

**7**

**8**

**9**

**10**

**11**

65325.13

66075.06

446421.27

941762.47

12347.84

66704.19

78213.52

79114.96

416913.84

837458.98

12083.96

69863.68

**dqy TOTAL
1598635.96
1493648.94**

vkdfLed ns;rk,a
Contingent Liabilities
olwyh ds fy, fcy
Bills for Collection

12
224540.02

36019.12

645263.22

34377.60
egRoiw.kZ ys[kkadu uhfr;ka vkSj ys[kksa ij fVIif.k;k
Significant Accounting Policies and Notes on Accounts

vuqlwph 1 ls 18 ys[kkvksa dk vfHkUu vax gSaA	
The Schedules 1 to 18 form an integral part of the Accounts.

**18**

**çcq) 'kekZ 
Prabudh Sharma
lgk;d egkçcaèkd
Asstt. General Manager**

**eqds'k dqekj
Mukesh Kumar     
lgk;d egkçcaèkd
Asstt. General Manager**

**vkj ds [khph
R K Khichi 
 mi egkçcaèkd 
Deputy General Manager**

**çoh.k dqekj 'kekZ
Praveen Kumar Sharma
egkçcaèkd
General Manager**

----

Mh ds tSu
D K Jain
eq[; egkçcaèkd ,oa lh,Qvks
Chief General Manager & CFO

fcHkq çlkn egkik=
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra 
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director

,e- ijef'koe 
M Paramasivam  
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director

fcuksn dqekj  
Binod Kumar
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director 

dY;k.k dqekj
Kalyan Kumar
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director

vrqy dqekj xks;y 
Atul Kumar Goel
çcaèk funs'kd ,oa eq[; dk;Zikyd vf/kdkjh
Managing Director & CEO

ds th vuar—".ku
K G Ananthakrishnan
vè;{k
Chairman

MkW- js[kk tSu
Dr. Rekha Jain
funs'kd
Director

latho dqekj fla?ky
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
funs'kd
Director

iadt tks’kh
Pankaj Joshi
funs'kd
Director

mek ’kadj
Uma Sankar
funs'kd
Director

iadt ’kekZ
Pankaj Sharma
funs'kd
Director

—rs Mh ds NktM+ ,aM daiuh  
For D K Chhajer & Co. 
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 304138bZ
FRN: 304138E     

 —rs ,l lh ckiuk ,aM ,lksfl,V~l  
For S C Bapna & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj 
 Chartered Accountants
 ,Qvkj,u% 115649MCY;w
FRN: 115649W  

—rs mesn tSu ,aM daiuh  
For Ummed Jain & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
 ,Qvkj,u% 119250MCY;w
FRN: 119250W

 lunh ys[kkdkj fnus'k xksfndk
CA Dinesh Godika
Hkkxhnkj 
Partner
¼lnL; la- 072738½
(M.No. 072738)  

—rs ,u ds HkkxZo ,aM daiuh
For N K Bhargava & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants  
,Qvkj,u% 000429,u 
 FRN:  000429N 

—rs ih ,l Mh ,aM ,lksfl,V~l
 For P S D & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 004501lh
 FRN: 004501C   

 lunh ys[kkdkj ,u ds HkkxZo  
CA N K Bhargava   
Hkkxhnkj 
Partner
¼lnL; la- 080624½ 
(M.No.080624)      

LFkku% ubZ fnYyh
Place: New Delhi
fnukad% 09 ebZ] 2024	
	

Date: May 09, 2024

----

**fooj.k**

**Particulars
vuqlwph
Schedule
31-03-2024 dks 
lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 
31.03.2024**

**31-03-2023 dks 
lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 
31.03.2023**

**I.  vk;
I.  INCOME**

vftZr vk;
Interest earned
13
109064.58
86845.29

vU; vk;
Other income
14
13329.43
12239.59

**dqy@TOTAL
122394.01
99084.88**

**II.  O;;
II.  EXPENDITURE**

vftZr vk;
Interest expended
15
68534.16
51816.99

ifjpkyu [kpZ
Operating expenses
16
28808.98
24335.68

izko/kku ,oa vkdfLedrk;sa
Provisions and contingencies
16721.96
19862.87

**dqy@TOTAL
114065.10
96015.54**

lgk;d laLFkkvksa esa vtZu dk va'k ¼fuoy½
Share of earnings in Associates (net)
17
828.24
289.44

?kVk,a% vYika'k fgr
Less : Minorities Interest
49.95
10.33

**vof/k ds fy, lewg dk lzksrtU; lesfdr ykHk@¼gkfu½
Consolidated Profit/(loss) for the period attributable to the group
9107.20
3348.45**

tksMs+% lewg dk lzksrtU; vkxs yk;k x;k lesfdr ykHk@¼gkfu½
Add: Brought forward consolidated profit/(loss) attributable to the group
3280.03
2538.54

**fofu;kstu ds fy, miyC/k ykHk
Profit available for Appropriation
12387.23 
5886.99**

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

**çcq) 'kekZ 
Prabudh Sharma
lgk;d egkçcaèkd
Asstt. General Manager**

**eqds'k dqekj
Mukesh Kumar     
lgk;d egkçcaèkd
Asstt. General Manager**

**vkj ds [khph
R K Khichi 
 mi egkçcaèkd 
Deputy General Manager**

**çoh.k dqekj 'kekZ
Praveen Kumar Sharma
egkçcaèkd
General Manager**

**Mh ds tSu
D K Jain
eq[; egkçcaèkd ,oa lh,Qvks
Chief General Manager & CFO**

**fcHkq çlkn egkik=
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra 
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**,e- ijef'koe 
M Paramasivam  
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**fcuksn dqekj  
Binod Kumar
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**dY;k.k dqekj
Kalyan Kumar
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**fooj.k**

**Particulars
vuqlwph
Schedule
31-03-2024 dks 
lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 
31.03.2024**

**31-03-2023 dks 
lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 
31.03.2023**

**III.  fofu;kstu
III.  APPROPRIATIONS**

lkafof/kd vkjf{kr fuf/k dks varfjr
Transfer to Statutory Reserves
2091.66
626.80

iwath vkjf{kr fuf/k dks varfjr
Transfer to Capital Reserves
46.28
52.15

fuos'k vkjf{kr fuf/k dks varfjr
Transfer to Investment Reserves
0.00
0.00

fuos'k ?kV c<+ vkjf{kr fuf/k dks varfjr
Transfer to Investment Fluctuation Reserves
288.95
194.74

vU; vkjf{kr fuf/k dks varfjr
Transfer to Other Reserves
3935.56
767.55

vk;dj ds vuqlkj fo'ks"k vkjf{kr fuf/k dks varfjr
Transfer to Special Reserves as per Income Tax Act
401.56
250.00

izLrkfor ykHkka'k
Proposed Dividend
1651.65
715.72

lesfdr rqyu i= esa ys tk;k x;k tek 'ks"k
Balance carried over to consolidated balance sheet
3971.57
3280.03

**12387.23
5886.99**

**izfr 'ks;j vtZu ¼#i;ksa esa½ ¼ewy@MkbZY;qVsM½
Earnings per Share (In Rs.) (Basic/ Diluted)
8.27**

 

**3.04**

egRoiw.kZ ys[kkadu uhfr;k¡ rFkk ys[kk fVIif.k;k¡
Significant Accounting Policies and Notes on Accounts
18

----

vrqy dqekj xks;y 
Atul Kumar Goel
çcaèk funs'kd ,oa eq[; dk;Zikyd vf/kdkjh
Managing Director & CEO

ds th vuar—".ku
K G Ananthakrishnan
vè;{k
Chairman

MkW- js[kk tSu
Dr. Rekha Jain
funs'kd
Director

latho dqekj fla?ky
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
funs'kd
Director

iadt tks’kh
Pankaj Joshi
funs'kd
Director

mek ’kadj
Uma Sankar
funs'kd
Director

iadt ’kekZ
Pankaj Sharma
funs'kd
Director

—rs Mh ds NktM+ ,aM daiuh  
For D K Chhajer & Co. 
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 304138bZ          
FRN: 304138E     

 —rs ,l lh ckiuk ,aM ,lksfl,V~l  
For S C Bapna & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj 
 Chartered Accountants
 ,Qvkj,u% 115649MCY;w
FRN: 115649W  

—rs mesn tSu ,aM daiuh  
For Ummed Jain & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
 ,Qvkj,u% 119250MCY;w
FRN: 119250W

 lunh ys[kkdkj fnus'k xksfndk
CA Dinesh Godika
Hkkxhnkj 
Partner
¼lnL; la- 072738½
(M.No. 072738)  

—rs ,u ds HkkxZo ,aM daiuh
For N K Bhargava & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants  
,Qvkj,u% 000429,u 
 FRN:  000429N 

—rs ih ,l Mh ,aM ,lksfl,V~l
 For P S D & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 004501lh
 FRN: 004501C   

 lunh ys[kkdkj ,u ds HkkxZo  
CA N K Bhargava   
Hkkxhnkj 
Partner
¼lnL; la- 080624½ 
(M.No.080624)      

LFkku% ubZ fnYyh
Place: New Delhi
fnukad% 09 ebZ] 2024	
	

Date: May 09, 2024

----

**fooj.k 
Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
 31-03-2023 dks
 As on 31.03.2023**

              
3000.00
              
3000.00

2202.20
2202.20

2202.20
2202.20

**TOTAL**

**vuqlwph 2 & vkjf{kr fufèk;ka vkSj vfèk'ks"k
SCHEDULE 2 - RESERVES AND SURPLUS**

I.  	 lkafofèkd vkjf{kr fufèk;ka 
Statutory Reserves

	
çkjafHkd 'ks"k 
Opening Balance

	
Add/(Less) : Adjustment during the year

16152.24

2091.66

0.00
18243.90

15525.44

626.80

0.00
16152.24

**lesfdr ys[kksa dh vuqlwfp;ka ¼iatkc uS'kuy cSad½
SCHEDULES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS (PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK)**

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

**fooj.k 
Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
 31-03-2023 dks
 As on 31.03.2023**

**II. 	 iwathxr vkjf{kr fufèk;ka  
Capital Reserves**

,- iqueZwY;kadu vkjf{kr fufèk
a.	 Revaluation Reserve
	
çkjafHkd 'ks"k 
Opening Balance	

	
o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f) 
Addition during the year

	
o"kZ ds nkSjku dVkSrh 
Deduction during the year

	
?kVk,¡% vU; vkjf{kr fufèk;ksa esa varfjr 
Less: Transfer to other reserves

	
¼laifÙk ds iqueZwY;kafdr Hkkx ij ewY;ºzkl ds dkj.k½ 
(being depreciation on revalued portion of property)

8455.12

20.40

1.22

168.67

**8305.63**

7048.62

2113.66

376.01

331.15

**8455.12**

16681.51

46.28
16727.79

16629.36

52.15
16681.51

**II	 ,-	 lesdu ij vkjf{kr iwath ¼fuoy½ 
A.	 Capital Reserve on consolidation (Net) 
74.21
74.21**

III. 	'ks;j çhfe;e 
Share Premium
     	çkjafHkd 'ks"k 
Opening Balance
     	o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f) 
Addition during the year

 

46038.53 
 
- 
 

**46038.53**

 

46038.53 

- 
 

**46038.53**

 

386.35 

 - 

 

**386.35**

386.35

 - 

 

**386.35**

   ch- 	 fuos'k mrkj&p<+ko vkjf{kr fufèk	
 
    b.	
Investment Fluctuation Reserve

	
çkjafHkd 'ks"k 
Opening Balance 

	
tksM+sa% o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f) 
Add: Addition during the year

 1635.06 

 288.95 

 

**1924.01**

 

1440.32 
 
194.74 

 

**1635.06**

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

fooj.k 
Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
 31-03-2023 dks
 As on 31.03.2023
lh- vU; vkjf{kr fufèk
c.  	Other Reserve	
	
çkjafHkd 'ks"k 
Opening Balance

	
tksM+sa% o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f) 
Addition during the year 

	
tksM+sa% iqueZwY;u vkjf{kr fufèk ls varj.k 
Add: Transfer from Revaluation Reserve

	
tksM+sa@¼?kVk,a½% o"kZ ds nkSjku lek;kstu 
Add/(Less) : Adjustment during the year

3513.07

3933.59

168.67

-0.01
7615.33

1321.59

1697.16

331.15

163.17
3513.07

Mh- fofue; mrkj&p<+ko vkjf{kr fufèk
d.	 Exchange Fluctuation Reserve
	
çkjafHkd 'ks"k 
Opening Balance

	
Add/(Less) : Adjustment during the year

843.52

11.61

21.87

 

**877.00**

1008.10

95.85

-260.43

 

**843.52**

	
çkjafHkd 'ks"k 
Opening Balance

	
o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f) 
Addition during the year

  

3618.66

401.56

 

**4020.22**

 3368.66 
 
250.00 

 

**3618.66**

**V. 	ykHk ,oa gkfu [kkrs esa 'ks"k jkf'k 
Balance in Profit & Loss Account
 3971.57 
 3280.03**

	
dqy ¼I, II, III, IV vkSj V½  
     Total (I, II, III, IV and V)

**108184.53 
 
100678.30**

**vuqlwph 2, & vYika'k fgr
Schedule 2A - Minority Interest**

ijorÊ o`f)@deh
Subsequent increase/ decrease

149.25

411.52

149.25

310.13
rqyu i= dh frfFk ij vYika'k fgr
Minority Interest at the date of balance sheet 
560.77
459.38

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

**fooj.k 
Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
 31-03-2023 dks
 As on 31.03.2023**

**vuqlwph 3 & tekjkf'k;ka
SCHEDULE 3 - DEPOSITS**

,- I  ekax tekjkf'k;ka
A.  I  Demand Deposits
        ¼i½ cSadksa ls 
             From Banks
     ¼ii½ vU; ls
              From Others

3290.71

70295.93
73586.64

3200.55

72587.74
75788.29

     II  cpr cSad tekjkf'k;ka
         Savings Banks Deposits
481272.10
465153.67

    III  fe;knh tekjkf'k;ka
         Term Deposits
         ¼i½ cSadksa ls
              From Banks
        (ii)  vU; ls
              From Others

66451.02

757915.48
824366.50

51083.07

698322.04
749405.11

**dqy ¼I, II vkSj III½
TOTAL  (I, II and III)
1379225.24
1290347.07**

ch-	¼i½ Hkkjr esa fLFkr 'kk[kkvksa dh tekjkf'k;ka
B.  (i)  Deposits of branches In India
     ¼ii½ Hkkjr ls ckgj fLFkr 'kk[kkvksa dh tekjkf'k;ka
     (ii)  Deposits of branches outside India

1333208.55

46016.69

1251329.97

39017.10
dqy TOTAL (i, ii)
1379225.24
1290347.07

**vuqlwph 4 & mèkkj jkf'k;ka
SCHEDULE 4 - BORROWINGS**

0.00

2713.70

22793.97

36301.40

2800.00

0.00

1869.36

23803.18

29199.40

2800.00

**II.   Hkkjr ds ckgj mèkkj jkf'k;ka
       Borrowings outside India
7976.55
12476.68**

**dqy ¼I vkSj II½ TOTAL (I and II)
72585.62
70148.62**

mi;Zqä I vkSj II esa 'kkfey çfrHkwr mèkkj jkf'k;ka 
Secured Borrowings included in I and II above
21464.34
21597.55

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

**fooj.k 
Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
 31-03-2023 dks
 As on 31.03.2023**

**vuqlwph 5 & vU; ns;rk,a vkSj çkoèkku
SCHEDULE 5 - OTHER LIABILITIES AND PROVISIONS**

I.   ns; fcy
     Bills payable
3361.27
3718.85

II.  varj&dk;kZy; lek;kstu ¼fuoy½ 
     Inter-office adjustments (net)
0.04
0.05

III. mifpr C;kt
     Interest accrued
4281.31
3451.14

IV. vU; ¼çkoèkkuksa lfgr½
     Others (including provisions)
28234.98
22643.33

**I, II, III vkSj IV dk ;ksx
TOTAL OF I, II, III and IV
35877.60
29813.37**

**vuqlwph 6 & Hkkjrh; fjt+oZ cSad ds ikl udnh vkSj 'ks"k jkf'k
SCHEDULE 6 - CASH AND BALANCES WITH RESERVE BANK OF INDIA**

I.   gkFk esa udnh
     Cash in hand
3553.35
3735.22

     ¼fons'kh eqæk uksVksa lfgr½ 
(including foreign currency notes) 

II.  Hkkjrh; fjt+oZ cSad ds ikl 'ks"k jkf'k
     Balance with Reserve Bank of India

    (i)  pkyw [kkrs esa 
    in Current account
61771.78
53352.30

    (ii)  vU; [kkrksa esa        
          in Other Accounts
0.00
61771.78
21126.00
74478.30

**dqy ¼I vkSj II ½  
TOTAL  (I and II)
65325.13
78213.52**

**vuqlwph 7 & cSadksa ds ikl 'ks"k rFkk ekax vkSj vYi lwpuk ij ns; jkf'k
SCHEDULE 7- BALANCES WITH BANKS AND MONEY AT CALL AND SHORT NOTICE**

**I.   Hkkjr esa     
In India**

 (i)  cSadksa esa 'ks"k jkf'k% 
 Balance with Banks:

 (,½ pkyw [kkrksa esa
 (a)  In Current accounts
5.82
25.09
    ¼ch½ vU; tek [kkrksa esa
 (b)  In Other Deposit accounts
22148.29
22154.11
16754.71
16779.80

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

**fooj.k 
Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
 31-03-2023 dks
 As on 31.03.2023**

369.17

22766.84
23136.01

0.00

23057.66
23057.66

dqy ¼i vkSj ii½
TOTAL (i and ii)
45290.12
39837.46

II.   Hkkjr ls ckgj
II.   Outside India
      (i)   pkyw [kkrksa esa 
            In Current accounts
     (ii)   vU; tek [kkrksa esa
            In Other Deposit accounts
     (iii)  ekax vkSj vYi lwpuk ij ns; jkf'k 
            Money at call and short notice

5313.31

15388.22

83.41

15405.09

23596.79

275.62
dqy ¼i, ii vkSj iii½ 
TOTAL (i, ii and iii)
20784.94
39277.50

**lexz tksM+ ¼I vkSj II½ 
GRAND TOTAL (I and II)
66075.06
79114.96**

**vuqlwph 8 & fuos'k
SCHEDULE 8 - INVESTMENTS**

392758.11

0.15

2843.68

34660.68

5502.46

4434.32

369306.55

0.15

3061.59

33153.84

4304.70

1452.39

**I dk dqy  
TOTAL of  I
440199.40
411279.22**

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

4518.88

368.72

1334.27

4324.37

337.22

973.03
II dk dqy TOTAL  of  II 
6221.87
5634.62

III. Hkkjr esa fuos'k 
     Investments in India 
     i)  fuos'k dk ldy ewY;
         Gross value of Investments
    ii)  ?kVk,¡% ewY;ºzkl ds fy, çkoèkkuksa dk dqy ;ksx 
         Less: Aggregate of provisions for depreciation

448513.51

8314.11

420441.66

9162.44

    iii) fuoy fuos'k 
         Net Investment 
440199.40
411279.22

IV. Hkkjr ds ckgj fuos'k
     Investments outside India 
     i) fuos'k dk ldy ewY;
        Gross value of Investments
    ii)  ?kVk,¡ ewY;ºzkl ds fy, çkoèkkuksa dk dqy ;ksx 
         Less: Aggregate of provisions for depreciation

6706.19

484.32

6126.47

491.85
    iii) fuoy fuos'k 
         Net Investment 
6221.87
5634.62

**(I), (II) dk lexz tksM+  GRAND TOTAL of  (I), (II)
446421.27
416913.84**

5598.88

403530.45

532633.14

3580.27

376124.54

457754.17

**dqy ¼i, ii rFkk iii½* Total (i, ii and iii)*
941762.47
837458.98**

694883.24

32372.64

214506.59

663558.23

22824.73

151076.02

**dqy ¼i, ii vkSj iii½ Total (i, ii and iii)
941762.47
837458.98**

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

fooj.k 
Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
 31-03-2023 dks
 As on 31.03.2023
lh-(I) Hkkjr esa vfxze  

C.(I)   Advances in India

         i)  çkFkfedrk {ks= 

             Priority sector

        ii)  lkoZtfud {ks= 

             Public sector

        iii) cSad

             Banks

        iv) vU;

            Others

257461.03

161112.74

4.05

476215.94

238476.44

166389.08

0.00

393261.26

**dqy ¼i, ii, iii vkSj iv½ Total (i, ii, iii and iv)
894793.76
798126.78**

**lh- ¼II½ Hkkjr ds ckgj vfxze**

**C.  (II) Advances outside India**

	
i)	
cSadksa ls çkI; 

       Due from banks

	
ii)	 vU; ls çkI; 

       Due from others

            ¼,½  [kjhns vkSj Hkquk, x, fcy 

            (a)  Bills purchased and discounted

            ¼ch½ lkewfgd _.k

      	
(b)  Syndicated Loans

            ¼lh½ vU;

      	
(c)  Others

18280.41

1563.61

12371.80

14752.89

15055.54

676.19

11068.44

12532.03

**dqy ¼i vkSj ii½
Total (i and ii)
46968.71
39332.20**

**lh ¼i½ vkSj lh ¼ii½ dk dqy ;ksx
GRAND TOTAL of  C (I) and C (II)
941762.47
837458.98**

*The facility-wise categorization of provisions has been realigned. Accordingly, previous year's figures have been regrouped without any change in total of advances.

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

**fooj.k 
Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
 31-03-2023 dks
 As on 31.03.2023**

**vuqlwph 10 & vpy vkfLr;ka**

**SCHEDULE 10 - FIXED ASSETS**

**I-  ifjlj**

I.   Premises
   fiNys o"kZ dh 31 ekpZ dks ykxr ij 

At Cost as on 31st March of preceeding year

     o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f) 

Additions during the year

      o"kZ ds nkSjku dVkSrh 

Deductions during the year

      o"kZ ds nkSjku iqueZwY;u 

Revaluation during the year

      vc rd ewY;ºzkl 

Depreciation to date

12093.04

109.39

0.97

19.18

2031.85
10188.79

10505.91

25.84

176.35

1737.65

1808.67
10284.37

**II.  Other Fixed Assets (including furniture and fixtures)
   fiNys o"kZ dh 31 ekpZ dks ykxr ij**

At Cost as on 31st March of preceeding year 
   fofue; nj esa mrkj&p<+ko ds dkj.k iqueZwY;u 

Revaluation due to exchange rate fluctuation
   o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f) 

Additions during the year
   o"kZ ds nkSjku dVkSrh 

Deductions during the year
   vc rd ewY;ºzkl

     Depreciation to date

9867.23

2.42

946.40

13.31

8849.33
1953.41

9217.64

0.00

661.18

11.58

8266.57
1600.66

**II,- iês okyh vkfLr;ka**

**IIA. Leased Assets**

**fiNys o"kZ dh 31 ekpZ dks ykxr ij**

 At Cost as on 31st March of preceeding year
    o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f)  

 Additions during the year
    o"kZ ds nkSjku dVkSrh      

       Deductions during the year
    vc rd ewY;ºzkl

       Depreciation to date

25.33

0.00

0.00

25.30
0.03

25.33

0.00

0.00

25.29
0.04

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

**fooj.k 
Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
 31-03-2023 dks
 As on 31.03.2023**

**IIch- daI;wVj l‚¶Vos;j**

IIB.  Computer Software
    fiNys o"kZ dh 31 ekpZ dks ykxr ij 

 At Cost as on 31st March of preceeding year
    fofue; nj esa mrkj&p<+ko ds dkj.k iqueZwY;u  

 Revaluation due to exchange rate fluctuation
    o"kZ ds nkSjku o`f)  

 Additions during the year
    o"kZ ds nkSjku dVkSrh

       Deductions during the year
    o"kZ ds nkSjku lek;kstu 

 Adjustment during the year 

 vkt rd ifj'kksfèkr

       Amortised to date

1287.72

0.80

119.21

11.76

0.79

1189.57
205.61

1233.94

0.00

53.78

0.00

0.00

1088.84
198.89

I] II] II,] IIch dk ;ksx
TOTAL OF I, II, IIA, IIB
12347.84
12083.96

**vuqlwph 11 & vU; vkfLr;ka**

**SCHEDULE 11 - OTHER ASSETS**

I.    varj&dk;kZy; lek;kstu ¼fuoy½  

Inter office adjustment (Net)

II.  mifpr C;kt  

Interest accrued 

III.  vfxze vnk fd;k x;k dj@lzksr ij dkVk x;k dj  

Tax paid in advance/tax deducted at source

IV.  LVs'kujh vkSj LVkai  

Stationery and stamps

V.  nkoksa ds fuiVu ls çkI; xSj&cSafdax vkfLr;ka 

Non banking assets acquired in satisfaction of claims

VI. vkLFkfxr dj vkfLr ¼fuoy½  

Deferred Tax asset (net)

VII. vU;  

Others

0.00

 12061.67

11061.89

8.11

26.45

22955.42

20590.65

0.00

9107.22

13171.92

6.43

26.45

23973.49

23578.17

**I] II] III] IV] V] VI vkSj VII dk ;ksx
TOTAL of I, II, III, IV, V, VI and VII
66704.19
69863.68**

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

**fooj.k 
Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks
As on 31.03.2024
 31-03-2023 dks
 As on 31.03.2023**

**vuqlwph 12 & vkdfLed ns;rk,a**

**SCHEDULE 12 - CONTINGENT LIABILITIES**

I.	 ¼i½   cSad ds fo#) ,sls nkos ftUgsa _.k ugha ekuk x;k gS 

	
(i) 	 Claims against the bank not acknowledged as debts
   ¼ii½   vihy] lanHkksZa vkfn ds vèkhu fookfnr vk;dj o C;kt dj ekax

	     (ii)	
Disputed income tax and interest tax 

	
	
demands under appeal, references, etc.

II.	 vkaf'kd :i ls çnÙk fuos'kksa ds fy, ns;rk,a 

      Liability for partly paid investments

III.  cdk;k ok;nk fofu;e lafonkvksa ds dkj.k ns;rk 

      Liability on account of outstanding 

     	forward exchange contracts

IV.	xzkgdksa dh vksj ls nh xbZ xkjaVh 

      Guarantees given on behalf of constituents
   ¼d½ Hkkjr esa   	

     (a)  In India
   ¼[k½ Hkkjr ds ckgj

	     (b)  Outside India

	
Acceptance, Endorsements and Other obligations

     Other items for which the Bank is contingently liable

771.35

7373.97

209.36

133554.22

54647.36

4308.96

18175.49

5499.31

814.56

8691.13

252.56

558916.88

49507.22

4644.20

16846.81

5589.86

**dqy ¼I, II, III, IV, V rFkk VI½
TOTAL (I, II, III, IV, V and VI)
224540.02
645263.22**

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

**fooj.k 
Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 31.03.2024
 31-03-2023 dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 31.03.2023**

**vuqlwph 13 & vftZr C;kt**

76515.79

29187.14

2822.85

538.80

57741.67

26401.79

1909.98

791.85

**dqy ¼I, II, III rFkk IV½ TOTAL (I, II, III and IV)
109064.58
86845.29**

**vuqlwph 14 & vU; vk;**

 

1411.54
134.07

 

1277.47

 

1137.77
356.68

 

**dqy ¼I, II, III, IV, V vkSj VI½ TOTAL (I, II, III, IV, V and VI)
13329.43
12239.59**

vuqlwph 15 & O;; fd;k x;k C;kt
SCHEDULE 15 - INTEREST EXPENDED
I.   tekjkf'k;ksa ij C;kt 
Interest on deposits
II.  Hkkjrh; fjt+oZ cSad@varj&cSad mèkkj ij C;kt 
Interest on Reserve Bank of India/ inter-bank borrowings
III.  vU; 
Others

62607.49

1289.86

4636.81

47018.04

1149.32

3649.63

**dqy ¼I, II rFkk III½ TOTAL  (I, II and III)
68534.16
51816.99**

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

**fooj.k 
Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 31.03.2024
 31-03-2023 dks lekIr o"kZ
Year ended 31.03.2023**

**vuqlwph 16 & ifjpkyu O;;**

**SCHEDULE 16 - OPERATING EXPENSES**

905.60

0.00

18643.24

1342.05

171.66

94.47

905.60

904.87

0.00

14942.59

1334.41

160.74

99.40

904.87

3.39

51.20

162.69

336.19

808.02

1700.17

4590.30

3.08

47.62

137.59

335.33

786.72

1552.84

4030.49

**I ls XII rd dk dqy tksM+
TOTAL of  I to XII
28808.98
24335.68**

782.64

45.60

244.89

44.55

**¼, vkSj ch½ dk ;ksx
TOTAL of  (a and b)
828.24
289.44**

----

**SCHEDULE 18 : CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL**

**SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES**

**1.	
BASIS OF PREPARATION:**

The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on 
historical cost basis and conform, in all material aspects, to Generally 
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) in India, unless otherwise 
stated, encompassing applicable statutory provisions, regulatory 
norms prescribed by Reserve Bank of India (RBI), circulars and 
guidelines issued by RBI from time to time, Banking Regulation 
Act 1949, Companies Act, 2013, Accounting Standards (AS) and 
pronouncements issued by The Institute of Chartered Accountants 
of India (ICAI) and prevailing practices in Banking industry in India.  

In respect of foreign entities, statutory provisions and practices 
prevailing in respective foreign countries are complied with except 
as specified elsewhere.

The financial statements have been prepared on going concern 
basis with accrual concept and in accordance with the accounting 
policies and practices consistently followed unless otherwise stated.

**USE OF ESTIMATES**

The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires the 
management to make estimates and assumptions considered in 
the reported amounts of assets and liabilities (including contingent 
liabilities) as on date of the financial statements and the reported 
income and expenses for the reporting period. Management 
believes that the estimates used in the preparation of the financial 
statements are prudent and reasonable. 

Future results could differ from these estimates. 

Difference between the actual results and estimates is recognized 
in the period in which the results are known / materialized.

Any revision to the accounting estimates is recognized prospectively 
in the current and future periods unless otherwise stated. 

**2.	
CONSOLIDATION PROCEDURES:**

**Subsidiaries**

i)	
PNB Gilts Ltd.

ii)	
PNB Investment Services Ltd.

iii)	
PNB Cards and Services Ltd.

iv)	 Punjab National Bank (International) Ltd., UK.

v)	
Druk PNB Bank Ltd, Bhutan.

**Associates:**

i)	
PNB Metlife India Insurance Company Ltd*

ii)	
PNB Housing Finance Limited

iii)	
JSC (Tengri Bank), Almaty,  Kazakhstan**

iv)	 Canara HSBC Life Insurance Co. Ltd.

**vuqlwph 18 & lesfdr foÙkh; foojf.k;ka**

**egRoiw.kZ ys[kkadu uhfr;ka**

**1-	 rS;kj djus dk vkèkkj%**

**vuqekuksa dk mi;ksx**

**Hkfo"; ds ifj.kke bu vuqekuksa ls fHkUu gks ldrs gSaA**

**2-	 lesdu çfØ;k%**

**leuq"kafx;ka**

	
i½	 ih,uch fxYV~l fyfeVsM

	
ii½	 ih,uch bUosLVesaV lÆolst fyfeVsM

**lg;ksxh daifu;ka%**

	
i½	 ih,uch esVykbQ bafM;k ba';ksjsal daiuh fyfeVsM*

	
ii½	 ih,uch gkmÇlx Qkbusal fy-

	
iv½	 dsujk ,p,lchlh ykbQ ba';ksjsal daiuh fyfeVsM

----

v)	
India SME Asset Reconstruction Co. Ltd.

vi)	 Everest Bank Limited, Kathmandu,   Nepal

vii)	 Dakshin Bihar Gramin Bank, Patna

viii)	 Himachal Pradesh Gramin Bank, Mandi

ix)	 Punjab Gramin Bank, Kapurthala

x)	
Sarva Haryana Gramin Bank, Rohtak

xi)	 Prathama UP Gramin Bank, Moradabad

xii)	 Assam Gramin Vikas Bank, Guwahati

xiii)	 Bangiya Gramin Vikas Bank, West Bengal

xiv)	 Manipur Rural Bank, Imphal

xv)	 Tripura Gramin Bank, Agartala

*PNB has acquired 30% stake in PNB Metlife at consideration of Rs. 700.48 
as brand equity.

**AFR revoked license of JSC Tengri Bank w.e.f. 18.09.2020 and is under 
Liquidation.

2.1	 Consolidated financial statements of the Group (comprising of 
5 Subsidiaries and 15 Associates as per detail given above) have 
been prepared on the basis of:

i.	
Audited financial statements of Punjab National Bank (Parent/
the Bank),

ii.	
As per AS 21, line by line aggregation of like items of assets, 
liabilities, income and expenses of subsidiaries with the 
respective item of the parent after eliminating material intra-
group balances/transactions, unrealized profit/losses and 
making necessary adjustments, wherever required, to conform 
to uniform accounting policies, based on data received from 
these subsidiaries, duly Audited/ certified by their Management. 
The financial statements of the subsidiaries are drawn up to 
the same reporting date as that of parent i.e. March 31, 2023.

iii.	
Foreign currency translation of overseas subsidiaries has 
been done as under:

(i)	
Income and Expenditure - at weighted average rates 
prevailing during the period.

(ii)	 Assets and Liabilities - at rates applicable at reporting 
date.	

	
The resultant foreign currency translation difference, 
whether gain or loss, has been included under Reserves 
and Surplus - Foreign Currency Translation Reserve.

(iii)	 Investments in associates, where the group holds 20% or 
more of the voting power, have been accounted for using 
the equity method in terms of Accounting Standard – 23 
issued by The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India.

2.2	 The difference between cost to the Group of its investment in 
the subsidiaries and the group’s portion of the equity of the 
subsidiaries is recognized as Goodwill/Capital Reserve.

2.3	 Minority interest in the net assets of consolidated subsidiaries 
consists of:

	
vii½	 nf{k.k fcgkj xzkeh.k cSad] iVuk

	
viii½	fgekpy çns'k xzkeh.k cSad] eaMh

	
ix½	 iatkc xzkeh.k cSad] diwjFkyk

	
x½	 loZ gfj;k.kk xzkeh.k cSad] jksgrd

	
xi½	 çFkek ;wih xzkeh.k cSad] eqjknkckn

	
xii½	 vle xzkeh.k fodkl cSad] xqokgkVh

	
xiii½	caxh; xzkeh.k fodkl cSad] if'pe caxky

	
xiv½	ef.kiqj xzkeh.k cSad] baQky

	
xv½	f=iqjk xzkeh.k cSad] vxjryk

i-	
iatkc uS'kuy cSad ¼ewy@cSad½ dh ys[kkijhf{kr foÙkh; foojf.k;ka]

iii-	 fons'kh vuq"kafx;ksa dk fons'kh eqæk varj.k fuEu vkèkkj ij fd;k  
x;k gS%

**2-2	 vuq"kafx;ksa esa blds fuos'k ds lewg dh ykxr rFkk lewg ds vuq"kafx;ksa 
dh bfDoVh ds Hkkx ds chp ds varj dks lk[k@iwath vkjf{kr fufèk 
ekuk x;k gSA**

**2-3	 lesfdr vuq"kafx;ksa dh fuoy vkfLr;ksa esa vYika'k fgr esa fuEufyf[kr 
'kkfey gSa%**

----

a)	
The amount of equity attributable to the minority at the 
date on which investments in a subsidiary is made; and

b)	
The minority share of movements in equity since date of 
parent-subsidiary relationship came into existence.

**SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES FOLLOWED BY THE 
PARENT:**

**3.	
REVENUE RECOGNITION:**

3.1	 Income & expenditure (other than items referred to in 
paragraph 3.5) are generally accounted for on accrual basis.

3.2	 Income from Non- Performing Assets (NPAs), comprising of 
advances and investments, is recognized upon realization, 
as per the prudential norms prescribed by the RBI/ respective 
country regulators in the case of foreign offices (hereafter 
collectively referred to as Regulatory Authorities).

3.3	 Mode of appropriation of recovery in order of priority will be as 
below:

(a)	 Appropriation of Recoveries in NPA accounts (irrespective of 
the mode / status / stage of recovery actions) shall be regulated 
in the following order of priority:

i.	
Expenditure/Out of Pocket Expenses incurred for 
Recovery (earlier recorded in Memorandum Dues)

ii.	
Thereafter towards the interest irregularities/accrued 
interest.

iii.	
Principal irregularities i.e. NPA outstanding in the account.

	
Clarification:

	
In case of borrowers who are having multiple accounts - 
On receiving recovery in one account system appropriates 
recovery towards Expenditure, Recorded Interest and 
Principal outstanding of same account. Further, surplus 
recovery amount, if any, takes care of Expenditure, Recorded 
Interest and Principal outstanding of another account for same 
Customer.

(b)	 However, in case of Compromise, Resolution/Settlement 
through NCLT, Technically Written Off (TWO) & Credits 
received on account of CGTMSE/ECGC/GECL/CGMFU and 
subsidy if any, shall be appropriated in the order of Principal, 
Charges and interest.

(c)	 In case of suit filed/decreed accounts, recovery shall be 
appropriated as under: -

i.	
As per the directives of the concerned Court.

ii.	
In the absence of specific directives from the Court, as 
mentioned at point (a) above.

	
Any exceptions to the above may be considered by HOCAC-III 
(for    proposals falling under the powers of various committee’s 
up to HOCAC-III & Management Committee for proposals 
under its vested powers.

**ewy cSad }kjk viukÃ xÃ egRoiw.kZ ys[kkadu uhfr;ka%**

**3-	 jktLo fu/kkZj.k%**

**3-3	 çkFkfedrk ds Øe esa olwyh ds fofu;kstu dk rjhdk bl çdkj 
gksxk%**

	
ii-	
blds ckn C;kt vfu;ferrkvksa@mikÆtr C;kt ds fy,A

	
iii-	 çeq[k vfu;ferrk,a vFkkZr [kkrs esa ,uih, cdk;kA

**Li"Vhdj.k%**

**¼lh½	okn nk;j @fMØh okys [kkrksa ds ekeys esa] olwyh fuEukuqlkj 
fofu;ksftr dh tk,xh% &**

	
i-	
lacafèkr U;k;ky; ds funsZ'kkuqlkjA

----

3.4	 The sale of NPA is accounted as per guidelines prescribed by 
RBI and as disclosed under Para 5.3.

3.5	 Commission (excluding on Government Business, Insurance 
Business, Mutual Fund Business, Letter of Credit and 
Bank Guarantee), exchange, locker rent and Income on 
Rupee Derivatives designated as ‘Trading’ are accounted 
for on realization and insurance claims are accounted for 
on settlement. Interest on overdue inland bills is accounted 
for on realization and interest on overdue foreign bill, till its 
crystallization is accounted for on crystallization and thereafter 
on realization.

3.6	 In case of suit ﬁled accounts, related legal and other expenses 
incurred are charged to Proﬁt & Loss Account and on recovery, 
the same are accounted for as such.

3.7	 Income from interest on refund of income tax is accounted for 
in the year the order is passed by the concerned authority.

3.8	 Lease payments including cost escalation for assets taken on 
operating lease are recognized in the Profit and Loss Account 
over the lease term in accordance with the AS 19 (Leases) 
issued by ICAI.

3.9	 Provision for Reward Points on Credit cards is made based on 
the accumulated outstanding points in each category.

3.10	If Term Deposit (TD) matures and proceeds are unpaid, the 
amount left unclaimed with the bank attracts rate of interest as 
applicable to savings account or the contracted rate of interest 
on the matured TD, whichever is lower.

3.11	Dividend (excluding Interim Dividend) is accounted for as and 
when the right to receive the dividend is established.

4.	
INVESTMENTS:

4.1	 The transactions in Securities are recorded on ‘Settlement 
Date’.

4.2	 Investments are classified into six categories as stipulated in 
Form A of the Third Schedule to the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949.

4.3	 Investments have been categorized into ‘Held to Maturity’, 
‘Available for Sale’ and ‘Held for Trading’ in terms of RBI 
guidelines as under:

(a)	 Securities acquired by the Bank with an intention to hold 
till maturity are classified under ‘Held to Maturity’.

(b)	 The securities acquired by the Bank with an intention to 
trade by taking advantages of short-term price/ interest 
rate movements are classified under ‘Held for Trading’.

(c)	 The securities, which do not fall within the above two 
categories, are classified under ‘Available for Sale’.

4-	 fuos'k%

----

4.4	 Investments in subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates are 
classified as HTM.

4.5	 Transfer of securities from AFS / HFT category to HTM 
category is made at the lower of book value or market value.

	
Provided that where the market value is higher than the book 
value at the time of transfer, the appreciation shall be ignored, 
and the security shall be transferred at the book value.

	
Provided further that in cases where the market value is lower 
than the book value, the provision for depreciation held against 
the security (including the additional provision, if any, required 
based on valuation done on the date of transfer) shall be 
adjusted to reduce the book value to the market value and the 
security shall be transferred at the market value.

	
However, transfer of securities from HTM category to AFS 
category is carried out on book value. After transfer, these 
securities are immediately revalued and resultant depreciation, 
if any, is provided.

4.6	 In determining acquisition cost of an investment:

(a)	 Brokerage, commission, Securities Transaction Tax (STT), 
etc., paid in connection with acquisition of securities are 
treated as revenue expenses upfront and excluded from 
cost.

(b)	 Interest accrued up to the date of acquisition/sale of 
securities, i.e., broken- period interest is excluded from 
the acquisition cost/sale consideration and the same is 
accounted as interest accrued but not due.

(c)	 Cost is determined on the weighted average cost method 
for all categories of investments.

4.7	 Investments are valued as per RBI/ FIMMDA guidelines, on 
the following basis:

Held to Maturity

(i)	
Investments under ‘Held to Maturity’ category are carried at 
acquisition cost.

	
Wherever the book value is higher than the face value/
redemption value, the premium is amortized over the remaining 
period to maturity on straight line basis. Such amortization of 
premium is reflected in Interest Earned under the head ‘Income 
on investments’ as a deduction.

(ii)	 Investments in subsidiaries/joint ventures/associates are 
valued at carrying cost less diminution, other than temporary 
in nature for each investment individually.

(iii)	 Investments in sponsored regional rural banks are valued at 
carrying cost.

(iv)	 Investment in Venture Capital is valued at carrying cost.

(v)	 Equity shares held in HTM category are valued at carrying 
cost.

4-6	 fdlh fuos'k dh vfèkxzg.k ykxr fuèkkZfjr djus esa%

----

**Available for Sale and Held for Trading:**

(a)
Govt. Securities

I.	
Central Govt. 
Securities
At market prices/YTM as published by Fixed 
Income 
Money 
Market 
and 
Derivatives 
Association of India (FIMMDA) / Financial 
Benchmark India Pvt. Ltd (FBIL).

II.	 State Govt. 
Securities
On appropriate yield to maturity basis as per 
FIMMDA/RBI guidelines.

(b)
Securities guaranteed 
by Central / State 
Government, PSU 
Bonds (not in the 
nature of advances)

On appropriate yield to maturity basis as per 
FIMMDA/RBI guidelines.

(c)
Treasury Bills
At carrying cost

(d)
Equity shares
At market price, if quoted, otherwise at 
breakup value of the Shares as per latest 
Balance Sheet. (The date as on which the 
latest balance sheet is drawn up shall not 
precede the date of valuation by more than 18 
months), otherwise at Re.1 per company.

(e)
Preference shares
At market price, if quoted, or on appropriate 
yield 
to 
maturity 
basis 
not 
exceeding 
redemption 
value 
as 
per 
RBI/FIMMDA 
guidelines.

(f)
Bonds and 
debentures (not in the 
nature of advances)

At market price, if quoted, or on appropriate 
yield to maturity basis as per RBI/FIMMDA 
guidelines.

(g)
Units of mutual funds
As per stock exchange quotation, if quoted; at 
repurchase price/NAV, if unquoted.

(h)
Commercial Paper
At carrying cost.

(i)
Certificate of Deposits
At carrying cost.

(j)
Security receipts
Investments by lenders in SRs (Security 
Receipts) / other securities issued by ARCs 
(Asset Reconstruction Companies) shall be 
valued periodically by reckoning the Net Asset 
Value (NAV) declared by the ARC based 
on the recovery ratings received for such 
instruments.

The Bank shall carry the investment in its 
books, on an ongoing basis until its transfer or 
its realization, at lower of redemption value of 
SRs arrived based on NAV, and the Net Book 
Value (NBV) of the transferred stressed loan at 
the time of transfer.

If the investment by the transferor (Bank) in 
SRs issued against loans transferred by it is 
more than 10 percent of all SRs issued against 
the transferred asset, then the valuation of the 
SRs on the books of the transferor shall be the 
lower of the following:

i)	
Net Asset Value (NAV) declared by the 
ARC based on the recovery ratings 
received for such instruments; and

ii)	 Face value of the SRs reduced by the 
notional provisioning rate applicable if the 
loans had continued on the books of the 
bank.

(k)
Venture Capital 
Funds
At net asset value (NAV) declared by the VCF.

(l)
Other Investments
At carrying cost less diminution in value.

**fcØh gsrq miyCèk ,oa O;kikj gsrq èkkfjr%**

**,½
ljdkjh çfrHkwfr;ka**

----

	
The above valuation in category of Available for Sale and 
Held for Trading is done scrip wise on quarterly basis and 
depreciation/appreciation is aggregated for each classification. 
Net depreciation for each classification, if any, is provided for 
while net appreciation is ignored. On provision for depreciation, 
the book value of the individual security remains unchanged 
after marking to market.

	
Investments in sponsored regional rural banks shall be valued 
at carrying cost irrespective of Category (HTM & AFS).

4.8	 Investments are subject to appropriate provisioning/ de-
recognition of income, in line with the prudential norms of 
Reserve Bank of India for NPI classification. The depreciation/
provision in respect of non-performing securities is not set off 
against the appreciation in respect of the other performing 
securities.

	
If any credit facility availed by an entity is NPA in the books of the 
Bank, investment in any of the securities issued by the same 
entity would also be treated as NPI and vice versa. However, 
in respect of NPI preference share where the dividend is not 
paid, the corresponding credit facility is not treated as NPA.

	
In case of securities, i.e., bonds, debentures, etc., where the 
credit facilities are availed by the borrowers, the provision has 
been made on the basis of YTM or IRAC norms whichever is 
higher. 

4.9	 Profit or loss on sale of investments in any category is taken 
to Profit and Loss account but, in case of profit on sale of 
investments in ‘Held to Maturity’ category, an equivalent 
amount (net of taxes and amount transferred to Statutory 
Reserve) is appropriated to ‘Capital Reserve Account’, at year 
end.

	
Profit or loss on redemption of investments in AFS & HFT 
category is reflected in interest earned income on investments, 
as an addition/deduction from interest income earned.

4.10	Securities repurchased/resold under buy back arrangement 
are accounted for at original cost.

4.11	The securities sold and purchased under Repo/Reverse 
Repo are accounted as Collateralized lending and borrowing 
transactions. However, securities are transferred as in the 
case of normal outright sale/purchase transactions and such 
movement of securities is reflected using the Repo/Reverse 
Repo Accounts and Contra entries. The above entries are 
reversed on the date of maturity. Costs and revenues are 
accounted as interest expenditure/income, as the case may 
be. Balance in Repo Account is classified under schedule 4 
(Borrowings).

4.12	The derivatives transactions are undertaken for trading or 
hedging purposes. Trading transactions are marked to market. 
As per RBI guidelines, different categories of swaps are valued 
as under:

----

	
Hedge Swaps

	
Interest rate swaps with hedge interest bearing asset or 
liability are accounted for on accrual basis except the swaps 
designated with an asset or liability that are carried at lower of 
market value or cost in the financial statement.

	
Gain or losses on the termination of swaps are recognized 
over the shorter of the remaining contractual life of the swap or 
the remaining life of the asset/ liabilities.

	
Trading Swaps

	
Trading swap transactions are marked to market with changes 
recorded in the financial statements.

	
Exchange Traded Derivatives entered into for trading 
purposes are valued at prevailing market rates based on rates 
given by the Exchange and the resultant gains and losses are 
recognized in the Profit and Loss Account.

4.13	 Foreign Currency Options:

	
Foreign currency options written by the Bank with a back-to-
back contract with another bank are not marked to market 
since there is no market risk.

	
Premium received is held as a liability and transferred to the 
Profit and Loss Account on maturity/cancellation.

5.	
LOANS / ADVANCES AND PROVISIONS THEREON:

5.1	 Advances are classified as performing and non-performing 
assets; provisions are made in accordance with prudential 
norms prescribed by RBI.

(a)	 Advances are classiﬁed: Standard, Sub Standard, 
Doubtful and Loss assets borrower wise.

(b)	 Advances are stated net of specific loan loss provisions, 
provision for diminution in fair value of restructured 
advances.

5.2	 In respect of foreign offices, the classification of loans and 
advances and provisions for NPAs are made as per the local 
regulations or as per the norms of RBI, whichever is more 
stringent.

	
Loans and advances held at the overseas branches that 
are identified as impaired as per host country regulations for 
reasons other than record of recovery, but which are standard 
as per the extant RBI guidelines, are classified as NPAs to the 
extent of amount outstanding in the host country.

5.3	 Financial Assets sold are recognized as under:

(a)	 Prudential norms for the transfer transactions to ARCs:

	
When the stressed loan is transferred to ARC at a price below 
the NBV at the time of transfer, the Bank has debited the 
shortfall to the profit and loss account for the year in which 
the transfer has taken place. Banks are permitted to use 
countercyclical or floating provisions for meeting any shortfall 
on transfer of stressed loan when the transfer is at a price 
below the NBV.

**gst LoSIl**

**VªsÇMx LoSi**

**4-13	  fons'kh eqæk fodYi%**

**5-	 _.k@vfxze vkSj blds fy, çkoèkku%**

**¼,½	 ,vkjlh esa varj.k ysunsu ds fy, foosdiw.kZ ekunaM%**

----

 	
On the other hand, when the stressed loan is transferred to an 
ARC for a value higher than the NBV at the time of transfer, 
lenders shall reverse the excess provision on transfer to the 
profit and loss account in the year the amounts are received 
and only when the sum of cash received by way of initial 
consideration and / or redemption or transfer of Security 
Receipts (SR) / Pass Through Certificates (PTCs)/ other 
securities issued by ARCs is higher than the NBV of the loan 
at the time of transfer. Further, such reversal are limited to the 
extent to which cash received exceeds the NBV of the loan at 
the time of transfer”

(b)	 Prudential norms for the transfer transactions to transferee(s) 
other than ARCs - Provisioning norms:

i. 	
When the bank transfers its NPAs to transferee(s) other 
than ARCs, the same are removed from the books on 
receipt of the entire transfer consideration. 

ii. 	
If the transfer to transferee(s) other than ARCs is at a price 
below the net NBV at the time of transfer, the shortfall is 
debited to the profit and loss account of the year in which 
transfer has taken place.

iii.	
If the sale consideration is for a value higher than the NBV 
at the time of transfer, the excess provisions has been 
reversed.

(c)	 The excess amount received, if any, over & above memoranda 
dues is credited proportionately to the respective heads of 
Income Interest on Loans and Advances say Income Interest 
on CC/ Term Loan, etc. 

	
In case, the excess amount is to be returned subsequently due 
to, e.g., DRT/Court orders or any other eventuality, the same 
head is debited to refund the excess amount recovered.

**5.4	 Restructured Assets:**

	
For restructured/rescheduled advances, provisions are made 
in accordance with guidelines issued by RBI from time to time. 
Provision for diminution in fair value of restructured advances is 
measured at net present value terms as per RBI guidelines for 
accounts where total dues to the bank are Rupees One Crore 
and above. For other accounts, the provision for diminution in 
fair value is computed notionally at 5% of total exposure to the 
bank as per RBI guidelines.

5.5	 In addition to the specific provision on NPAs, general 
provisions are also made for standard assets as per extant 
RBI Guidelines. These provisions are reflected in Schedule 
5 of the Balance Sheet under the head ‘Other Liabilities & 
Provisions – Others’ and are not considered for arriving at the 
Net NPAs.

5.6	 Amounts recovered against debts written-off in earlier years 
and provisions no longer considered necessary in the context 
of the current status of the borrower are recognized in the 
profit and loss account.

**5-4	iquxZfBr vkfLr;ka%**

----

**5.7	 Provision for Country Exposure:**

	
In addition to the specific provisions held according to the 
asset classification status, provisions are also made for 
individual country exposures (other than the home country). 
Countries are categorized into seven risk categories, namely, 
insignificant, low, moderately low, moderate, moderately high, 
high and very high, and provisioning made as per extant RBI 
guidelines. If the country exposure (net) of the Bank in respect 
of each country does not exceed 1% of the total funded assets, 
no provision is maintained on such country exposures. The 
provision is reflected in Schedule 5 of the Balance Sheet under 
the ‘Other Liabilities & Provisions – Others’.

5.8	 An additional provision of 2% (in addition to country risk 
provision that is applicable to all overseas exposures) against 
standard assets representing all exposures to step down 
subsidiaries of Indian Corporates has been made to cover the 
additional risk arising from complexity in the structure, location 
of different intermediary entities in different jurisdictions 
exposing the Indian Company, and hence the Bank, to a 
greater political and regulatory risk. (As per RBI Cir.No. RBI/ 
2015.16/279 DBR. IBD.BC No. 68/ 23.37.001/ 2015-16 dated 
31.12.2015).

**6.	
PROPERTY, PLANT & EQUIPMENT:**

6.1	 Property, Plant & Equipment are stated at historical cost less 
accumulated depreciation/amortization, wherever applicable, 
except those premises, which have been revalued. The 
appreciation on revaluation is credited to revaluation reserve 
and incremental depreciation attributable to the revalued 
amount is deducted there from.

6.2	 Software is capitalized and clubbed under Intangible assets.

6.3	 Cost includes cost of purchase and all expenditure such as 
site preparation, installation costs and professional fees 
incurred on the asset till the time of capitalization. Subsequent 
expenditure/s incurred on the assets are capitalized only 
when it increases the future benefits from such assets or their 
functioning capability.

**6.4	 Depreciation:**

A.	
Depreciation on assets (including land where value is not 
separable) is provided on straight-line method based on 
estimated life of the asset, except in respect of computers 
where it is calculated on the straight-line method, at the rates 
prescribed by RBI.

**5-7	fdlh ns'k esa ,Dlikst+j ds fy, çkoèkku%**

**6-	 laifÙk] la;a= vkSj midj.k%**

**6-4	ewY;ºzkl%**

----

B.	
Depreciation on assets has been provided at the rates 
furnished below: -

Particulars
Rate of Depreciation

PREMISES

Freehold Properties

Land
NIL

Depreciation to be provided on 
Construction 
Cost 
where 
the 
land cost is segregated and on 
total cost where the land cost is 
not ascertainable and cannot be 
segregated

2.50% (40 years Straight 
Line Method or remaining life 
whichever is lower)

Land acquired on perpetual lease 
where no lease period is mentioned
NIL

Land acquired on lease where 
lease period is mentioned
Over lease period

Building

Constructed on free hold land and 
on leased land, where lease period 
is above 40 years

2.50%

Constructed on leased land where 
lease period is below 40 years
Over lease period

FIXED 
ASSETS 
EXCEPT 
PREMISES

Furniture and fixtures- Steel articles
5.00%

Furniture 
and 
fixtures-wooden 
articles
10.00%

Mattresses
20.00%

Mobile Phone Instruments
33.33%

Machinery, 
electrical 
and 
miscellaneous articles
15.00%

Motor cars and cycles
15.00%

Computers, ATMs 
and 
related 
items, Laptop, I- pad, etc., Servers, 
Network, Equipment & Automated 
Teller Machines (Including software 
forming an integral part of computer 
hardware)

33.33%

	
Items of office fixed assets amounting less than Rs. 25,000/- 
and/or having useful life of less than 12 months from the 
date of acquisition are recognized as expense (except to 
staff, items costing more than Rs. 1,500/- which can be 
separately used). Assets costing less than Rs. 1,500/- each 
are depreciated@100% in the year of purchase.

	
Cost of Application Software / Operating System / Data base 
amounting up to Rs. 25,000/- are charged to revenue.

C.	
Depreciation on fresh additions to assets other than Bank’s 
own premises is provided from the day in which the assets are 
capitalized and in the case of assets sold/disposed-off during 
the year, up to the date in which it is sold/ disposed-off, i.e., 
daily basis.

2.50%

QuÊpj vkSj fQDLpj&ydM+h dh oLrq,a
10.00%

xís
20.00%

eksckby Q+ksu midj.k
33.33%

e'khujh] fctyh dh vkSj fofoèk oLrq,a
15.00%

eksVj dkjsa vkSj lkbfdysa
15.00%

33.33%

----

D.	
The depreciation on bank’s own premises existing at the close 
of the year is charged for full year. The construction cost is 
depreciated only when the building is complete in all respects. 
Where the cost of land and building cannot be separately 
ascertained, depreciation is provided on the composite cost, 
at the rate applicable to buildings.

E.	
In respect of leasehold premises, the lease premium, if any, 
is amortized over the period of lease and the lease rent is 
charged in the respective year(s).

F.	
The Revalued assets is depreciated over the balance useful 
life of the asset as assessed at the time of revaluation.

**7.	
IMPAIRMENT OF ASSETS:**

	
The carrying costs of assets are reviewed at each Balance 
Sheet date if there is any indication of impairment based on 
internal/external factors, an impairment loss is recognized 
wherever the carrying cost of an asset exceeds its recoverable 
amount. The recoverable amount is the greater of the assets 
net selling price and value in use. In assessing value in use, 
the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present 
value using a pre-tax discount rate that reflects current market 
assessments of the time value of money and risks specific to 
the asset.

	
After impairment, if any, depreciation is provided on the 
revised carrying cost of the asset over its remaining useful 
life. A previously recognized impairment loss is increased or 
reversed depending on changes in circumstances. However, 
the carrying value after reversal is not increased beyond the 
carrying value that would have prevailed by charging usual 
depreciation if there was no impairment.

**8.	
EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS:**

	
PROVIDENT FUND:

	
Provident fund is a defined contribution scheme as the Bank 
pays fixed contribution at pre-determined rates. The obligation 
of the Bank is limited to such fixed contribution. The contribution 
is charged to Profit & Loss A/c.

	
GRATUITY:

	
Gratuity liability is a defined benefit obligation and is provided 
for on the basis of an actuarial valuation. The scheme is funded 
by the Bank and is managed by a separate trust.

	
PENSION:

	
Pension liability is a defined benefit obligation and is provided 
for on the basis of an actuarial valuation. The scheme is funded 
by the Bank and is managed by a separate trust.

	
The Bank operates a New Pension Scheme (NPS) for all 
officers/ employees who have joined the Bank on or after 
01.04.2010. As per the scheme, the covered employees 

**7-	 vkfLr;ksa dh vilkekR;rk%**

**8-	 ,EIy‚;esaV ykHk%**

**Hkfo"; fufèk%**

**minku%**

**isa'ku %**

----

contribute 10% of their basic pay plus dearness allowance to 
the scheme together with contribution of 14% of their basic pay 
plus dearness allowance from the Bank. Pending completion 
of the registration procedures of the employees concerned, 
these contributions are retained. The Bank recognizes such 
annual contributions as an expense in the year to which they 
relate. Upon the receipt of the Permanent Retirement Account 
Number (PRAN), the consolidated contribution amounts are 
transferred to the NPS Trust.

**COMPENSATED ABSENCES:**

	
Accumulating compensated absences such as Privilege 
Leave (PL) and Sick Leave (including unavailed casual leave) 
are provided for based on actuarial valuation. The scheme for 
Privilege Leave (PL) is funded by the Bank and is managed by 
a separate trust.

**OTHER EMPLOYEE BENEFITS:**

	
Other Employee Benefits such as Leave Fare Concession 
(LFC), Silver Jubilee Award, etc., are provided for based on 
actuarial valuation. 

	
In respect of overseas branches and offices, the benefits 
in respect of employees other than those on deputation 
are valued and accounted for as per laws prevailing in the 
respective countries.

	
The valuation method used for defined benefit obligations for 
employee benefits is ‘Projected Unit Credit Method’.

**9.	
TRANSLATION OF FOREIGN CURRENCY TRANSACTIONS 
& BALANCES:**

	
Transactions involving foreign exchange are accounted for 
in accordance with AS 11, ‘The Effect of Changes in Foreign 
Exchange Rates’.

9.1	 Except advances of erstwhile London branches which are 
accounted for at the exchange rate prevailing on the date 
of parking in India, all other monetary assets and liabilities, 
guarantees, acceptances, endorsements and other obligations 
are translated in Indian Rupee equivalent at the exchange 
rates prevailing as on the Balance Sheet date as per Foreign 
Exchange Dealers’ Association of India (FEDAI) guidelines.

9.2	 Non-monetary items other than fixed assets which are carried 
at historical cost are translated at exchange rate prevailing on 
the date of transaction.

9.3	 Outstanding Forward exchange spot and forward contracts are 
translated as on the Balance Sheet date at the rates notified 
by FEDAI and the resultant gain/loss on translation is taken to 
Profit & Loss Account.

	
Foreign exchange spot/forward contracts/deals (Merchant and 
Inter-bank) which are not intended for trading/Merchant Hedge 
and are outstanding on the Balance Sheet date, are reverse 

**{kfriwÆr vuqifLFkfr;ka%**

**vU; deZpkjh ykHk%**

**9-	 fons'kh eqæk ysunsu vkSj 'ks"k jkf'k dk :ikarj.k%**

----

re-valued at the closing FEDAI spot/forward rate in order to 
remove revaluation effect on exchange profit. The premium or 
discount arising at the inception of such a forward exchange 
contract is amortized as interest expense or income over the 
life of the contract.

9.4	 Income and expenditure items are accounted for at the 
exchange rate prevailing on the date of transaction.

	
Exchange differences arising on the settlement of monetary 
items at rates different from those at which they were initially 
recorded are recognized as income or as expense in the 
period in which they arise.

	
Gains/Losses on account of changes in exchange rates of 
open position in currency futures trades are settled with the 
exchange clearing house on daily basis and such gains/losses 
are recognized in the Profit and Loss Account.

**9.5	 Offices outside India / Offshore Banking Units:**

(i)	
Operations of foreign branches and off shore banking 
unit are classified as ‘Non-integral foreign operations’ and 
operations of representative offices abroad are classified 
as ‘integral foreign operations’.

(ii)	 Foreign 
currency 
transactions 
of 
integral 
foreign 
operations and non-integral foreign operations are 
accounted for as prescribed by AS-11.

(iii)	 Exchange Fluctuation resulting into Profit / loss of non-
integral operations is credited /debited to Exchange 
Fluctuation Reserve.

**10.	 TAXES ON INCOME**

	
Income tax expense is the aggregate amount of current tax 
including Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT), wherever applicable 
and deferred tax expense incurred by the Bank. The current 
tax and deferred tax are determined in accordance with the 
provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and as per Accounting 
Standard 22 - Accounting for Taxes on Income respectively 
after taking into account taxes paid at the foreign offices, which 
are based on the tax laws of respective jurisdictions. 

	
MAT credit is recognized as an asset only when and to the 
extent there is convincing evidence that there will be payment 
of normal income tax during the period specified under the 
income Tax Act, 1961.

	
Deferred Tax adjustments comprises of changes in the 
deferred tax assets or liabilities during the year. Deferred tax 
assets and liabilities are recognized by considering the impact 
of timing differences between taxable income and accounting 
income for the current year, and carry forward losses. Deferred 
tax assets and liabilities are measured using tax rates and 
tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at 
the balance sheet date. The impact of changes in deferred 

**9-4	 vk; rFkk O;; dh enksa dks ysunsu dh frfFk dks çpfyr fons'kh 
fofue; nj ij ys[kkc) fd;k tkrk gSA**

**10-	vk; ij dj**

----

tax assets and liabilities is recognized in the profit and loss 
account. Deferred tax assets are recognized and re-assessed 
at each reporting date, based upon management’s judgment 
as to whether their realization is considered as reasonably/
virtually certain.

**11.	 EARNINGS PER SHARE:**

	
The Bank reports basic and diluted earnings per share in 
accordance with AS 20 - ‘Earnings per Share’ issued by the 
ICAI. Basic Earnings per Share is computed by dividing the Net 
Profit after Tax for the year attributable to equity shareholders 
by the weighted average number of equity shares outstanding 
for the year.

	
Diluted Earnings per Share reflects the potential dilution that 
could occur if securities or other contracts to issue equity 
shares were exercised or converted during the year. Diluted 
Earnings per Share is computed using the weighted average 
number of equity shares and dilutive potential equity shares 
outstanding.

**12.	 PROVISIONS, 
CONTINGENT 
LIABILITIES 
AND 
CONTINGENT ASSETS:**

	
In conformity with AS 29, ‘Provisions, Contingent Liabilities 
and Contingent Assets’, issued by the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of India, the Bank recognizes provisions only 
when it has a present obligation as a result of a past event, and 
it is probable that outflow of resources embodying economic 
benefits will be required to settle the obligation, and when a 
reliable estimate of the amount of the obligation can be made.

	
A Contingent Liability is a potential liability, in terms of money, 
which may arise depending on the outcome of an uncertain 
specific event. A possible obligation which may or may not 
arise depending on how a future event unfolds has been 
recognized as Contingent Liability.

	
Further, the cases which although have been filed against the 
Bank, but possibility of any obligation arising upon the Bank in 
those case is remote, have not been construed and included 
in Contingent Liability.

	
Contingent Assets are not recognized in the financial 
statements.

**13.	 BULLION TRANSACTIONS:**

	
The Bank imports bullion including precious metal bars on a 
consignment basis for selling to its customers. The imports 
are typically on a back-to-back basis and are priced to the 
customer based on price quoted by the supplier. The Bank 
earns a fee on such bullion transactions.

	
The fee is classified under commission income. The Bank also 
accepts deposits and lends gold, which is treated as deposits/
advances as the case may be with the interest paid / received 
classified as interest expense/income.

**11-	çfr 'ks;j vk; %**

**12-	çkoèkku] vkdfLed ns;rk,a ,oa vkdfLed vkfLr;ka%**

**foÙkh; fooj.kh esa vkdfLed ns;rkvksa dh igpku ugÈ gksrh gSA**

**13-	cqfy;u ysunsu %**

----

**14.	 SEGMENT REPORTING:**

	
The Bank recognizes the Business segment as the Primary 
reporting segment and Geographical segment as the 
Secondary reporting segment, in accordance with the RBI 
guidelines and in compliance with the Accounting Standard 17 
issued by ICAI.

15.	 The Bank, in accordance with RBI Circular FIDD.CO.Plan.
BC.23/ 04.09.01/ 2015-16 dated April 7, 2016, trades in Priority 
Sector portfolio by selling or buying PSLC. There is no transfer 
of risks or loan assets in these transactions. The fee paid for 
purchase of the PSLC is treated as an ‘Expense’ and the Fee 
received from sale of PSLCs is treated as ‘Other Income’.

**16.	 CASH & CASH EQUIVALENTS**

	
Cash and cash equivalents include:

a)	
Cash and Balances with RBI, Balances with Bank and money 
at call and short notice.

b)	
The balances in Reverse Repo are reported as per the 
guidelines provided by RBI vide its circular dated 19.05.2022, 
(i.e., under schedule 6, schedule 7 and schedule 9, as 
applicable). The balance held by the Bank under Standing 
Deposit Facility (SDF) is also reported similarly. 

**14-	[kaMokj fjiksÉVx%**

**16-	udn ,oa udn lerqY;**

**udnh ,oa udnh lerqY; esa 'kkfey gSa%**

----

**NOTES TO ACCOUNTS**

**1. 	 The 05 Subsidiaries and 15 Associates (which along with 
Punjab National Bank, the parent, constitute the Group) are 
considered in the preparation of the consolidated financial 
statements are as under:
(in %)**

Sl. 
No.
Name of the Subsidiary 
Company
Country of 
incorporation
% Voting power held 
as at

Current 
Year
Previous 
Year

1.
PNB Gilts Limited1
India
74.07
74.07

2.
PNB Investment Services Ltd.1
India
100.00
100.00

3.
PNB Cards and Services Ltd.1
India
100.00
100.00

4.
Punjab National Bank 

(International) Ltd.UK$
United 
Kingdom
100.00
100.00

5.
Druk PNB Bank Ltd. Bhutan*
Bhutan
51.00
51.00

**$Un-Audited Financials have been taken while preparing consolidated 
financial statements of PNB group.**

**1The financial statements of the company is subject to Supplementary Audit 
by the Comptroller & Audit General of India, under the Companies Act, 2013 
and receipt of their report.**

***Druk PNB Bank Ltd. Bhutan follows accounting year different from that of 
the parent.**

**2.	
Associates 
considered 
in 
consolidated 
financial 
statements are as under:**

**(in %)**

Sl. 
No.
  Associates 
Country of 
incorporation
Proportion 
of ownership 
percentage as at

Current 
Year
Previous 
Year

1.
PNB Metlife India Insurance Company 
Ltd*
India
30.00
30.00

2.
PNB Housing Finance Limited
India
28.13
32.52

3.
JSC (Tengri Bank), Almaty,  Kazakhstan**
Kazakhstan
41.64
41.64

4.
Canara HSBC Life Insurance Co. Ltd.
India
23.00
23.00

5.
India SME Asset Reconstruction Co. Ltd.$
India
20.90
20.90

6.
Everest Bank Ltd.$***
Nepal
20.02
20.02

7.
Dakshin Bihar Gramin Bank, Patna$
India
35.00
35.00

8.
Himachal Pradesh Gramin Bank, Mandi$
India
35.00
35.00

9.
Punjab Gramin Bank, Kapurthala$
India
35.00
35.00

10.
Sarva Haryana Gramin Bank, Rohtak
India
35.00
35.00

11.
Prathama UP Gramin Bank, Moradabad$
India
35.00
35.00

12.
Assam Gramin Vikas Bank, Guwahati
India
35.00
35.00

13.
Bangiya Gramin Vikas Bank, (West 
Bengal)
India
35.00
35.00

14.
Manipur Rural Bank, Imphal
India
35.00
35.00

15.
Tripura Gramin Bank, Agartala
India
35.00
35.00

**$Un-Audited Financials have been taken while preparing consolidated 
financial statements of PNB group.**

***PNB has acquired 30% stake in PNB Metlife at consideration of Rs. 700.48 
as brand equity.**

**ys[kksa ij fVIif.k;ka**

2.
ih,uch bUosLVesaV lÆolst fyfeVsM1
Hkkjr
100.00
100.00

3.
ih,uch dkM~lZ ,aM lÆolst fyfeVsM1
Hkkjr
100.00
100.00

100.00
100.00

**2-	 lesfdr foÙkh; fooj.k esa ekus x, lg;ksxh bl çdkj 
gSa%**

**¼% esa½**

2.
ih,uch gkmÇlx Qkbusal fyfeVsM
Hkkjr
28.13
32.52

4.
dsujk ,p,lchlh ykbQ ba';ksjsal 
daiuh fyfeVsM
Hkkjr
23.00
23.00

5.
Hkkjr ,l,eÃ vkfLr iquÆuekZ.k 
daiuh fyfeVsM$
Hkkjr
20.90
20.90

6.
,ojsLV cSad fyfeVsM$***
usiky
20.02
20.02

7.
nf{k.k fcgkj xzkeh.k cSad] iVuk$
Hkkjr
35.00
35.00

8.
fgekpy çns'k xzkeh.k cSad] eaMh$
Hkkjr
35.00
35.00

9.
iatkc xzkeh.k cSad] diwjFkyk$
Hkkjr
35.00
35.00

10.
loZ gfj;k.kk xzkeh.k cSad] jksgrd
Hkkjr
35.00
35.00

11.
çFkek ;wih xzkeh.k cSad] eqjknkckn$
Hkkjr
35.00
35.00

12.
vle xzkeh.k fodkl cSad] xqokgkVh
Hkkjr
35.00
35.00

13.
caxh;k xzkeh.k fodkl cSad]  
¼if'pe caxky½
Hkkjr
35.00
35.00

14.
ef.kiqj xzkeh.k cSad] bEQky
Hkkjr
35.00
35.00

15.
f=iqjk xzkeh.k cSad] vxjryk
Hkkjr
35.00
35.00

****18-09-2020 ,,Qvkj us  ts,llh Vsaxjh cSad dk ykblsal jí dj fn;k ,oa ifjlekiu**

----

**AFR revoked license of JSC Tengri Bank w.e.f. 18.09.2020 and is under 
Liquidation.

***Everest Bank Ltd. Follows accounting year different from that of the 
parent.

**3.1	 Capital Reserve
(Amount in Rs Crore)**

**Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

**Capital Reserve on 
Consolidation (Net)
74.21
74.21**

**3.2	 Perpetual bonds/sub-ordinated debt raised as Tier I and 
Tier II Capital:**

**(Amount in Rs Crore)**

**Particulars
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year**

Amount of non-equity Tier 1 capital raised 
during the year,

of which:
6012.00
4214.00

a)	 Basel III compliant Perpetual Non-
Cumulative Preference Shares,
NIL
NIL

b)	 Basel III compliant Perpetual Debt 
Instruments
6012.00
4214.00

Amount of Tier 2 capital raised during the year, 
of which Basel III compliant :  
3090.00
4101.98

a)	 Debt Capital Instruments as Tier 2 Capital
3090.00
4101.98

b)	 Perpetual Cumulative Preference Shares
NIL
NIL

c)	 Redeemable Non-Cumulative Preference 
Shares
NIL
NIL

d)	 Redeemable Cumulative Preference Shares
NIL
NIL

**3.3	 The capital adequacy ratio (as per Basel III) of the bank  
	
group is as under:
(Amount in Rs Crore)**

**Sr. 
No.
Particulars
Current 
Year
Previous 
Year**

i)
Common Equity Tier 1 capital (CET 1)
(net of deductions, if any)
83256.67
75580.00

ii)
 Additional Tier 1 capital
16001.74
9972.33

iii)
 Tier 1 capital (i + ii)
99258.41
85552.33

iv)
 Tier 2 capital
20950.77
18910.34

v)
 Total capital (Tier 1+Tier 2)
120209.18
104462.67

vi)
 Total Risk Weighted Assets (RWAs)
751614.25
672297.09

vii)
CET 1 Ratio (CET 1 as a percentage 
of RWAs)
11.08%
11.24%

viii)
Tier 1 Ratio (Tier 1 capital as a 
percentage of RWAs)
13.21%
12.73%

ix)
Tier 2 Ratio (Tier 2 capital as a 
percentage of RWAs)
2.79%
2.81%

x)
Capital to Risk Weighted Assets Ratio 
(CRAR) (Total Capital as a percentage 
of RWAs)

16.00%
15.54%

xi)
Leverage Ratio
5.96%
4.77%

Note: CETI Capital includes Amalgamation Reserve Rs. 9268.29 Crore.

**ds vèkhu gSA**

**3-1	vkjf{kr iwath 
¼jkf'k djksM+ #i;s esa½**

**fooj.k
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ
lesdu ij iwath vkjf{kr ¼fuoy½
74.21
74.21**

**¼jkf'k djksM+ #i;s esa½**

,)	  csly III vuq:i LFkk;h xSj&lap;h  
    ojh;rk 'ks;j]
'kwU;
'kwU;

ch)	csly III vuqikyd LFkk;h _.k baLVªwesaV~l
6012.00
4214.00

o"kZ ds nkSjku oÆèkr fV;j 2 iwath dh jkf'k] 
ftlesa ls csly III vuqikyd% 

3090.00
4101.98

,)	  fV;j 2 iwath ds :i esa _.k iwath    
    baLVªwesaV~l

3090.00
4101.98

83256.67
75580.00

ii)
vfrfjä fV;j 1 iwath
16001.74
9972.33

iii)
fV;j 1 iwath (i + ii)
99258.41
85552.33

iv)
fV;j 2 iwath
20950.77
18910.34

v)
 dqy iwath ¼fV;j 1$fV;j 2½
120209.18
104462.67

vi)
dqy tksf[ke Hkkfjr vkfLr;ka ¼vkjMCY;w,½
751614.25
672297.09

11.08%
11.24%

13.21%
12.73%

2.79%
2.81%

16.00%
15.54%

xi)
yhojst vuqikr
5.96%
4.77%

----

RBI vide circular No. DOR.CAP.REC.15/21.06.201/2023-24 
dated 12th May, 2023 has given discretion to banks to consider 
Revaluation Reserve, Foreign Currency Translation Reserve and 
Deferred Tax Asset for purpose of computation of Capital Adequacy 
as CET-1 capital ratio. The Bank has exercised the option in the 
above computation.

**4.	
Disclosures required by Accounting Standards**

**4.1	 Accounting Standard 5 – Net Profit or Loss for the Period,  
	
Prior Period items and Change in Accounting Policies**

During the Current and Previous year there were no material 
prior period income/expenditure items requiring disclosure under 
Accounting Standard 5. 

The financial results for the year ended March 31, 2024 have been 
prepared following the same Accounting Policies and practices as 
those followed in the annual financial statements for the year ended 
March 31, 2023.

(Previous year: The financial results for the year ended March 31, 
2023 have been prepared following the same Accounting Policies 
and practices as those followed in the annual financial statements 
for the year ended March 31, 2022).

**4.2    Accounting Standard 9 - Revenue Recognition**

The income which has been accounted for on realization basis is 
not considered to be material. (Previous year: The income which 
has been accounted for on realization basis is not considered to 
be material).

4.3	 Accounting Standard 10 – Properties, Plant and Equipment. 

Break-up of total depreciation for the period/ FY for each class of 
assets
(Amount in Rs Crore)

Particulars  (Class of Assets)
Current Year
Previous Year

Premises
223.18
202.12

Other fixed assets
578.66
551.95

Leased assets
0.01
0.01

Computer software
103.75
150.79

Total
905.60
904.87

**4.4	 Accounting Standard 11- The effects of Changes in  
	
Foreign Exchange rates:**

Movement of Foreign Currency Fluctuation Reserve  

(Amount in Rs Crore)

Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year

Opening Balance 
843.52
1008.10

Addition/Deduction during the FY due 
to change in Profit & Loss account 
3.10
6.05

Addition/Deduction during the FY due 
to translation of Assets & Liabilities
30.39
79.26

Other Adjustment
0.00
-249.89

Closing Balance
877.00
843.52

**4-	 ys[kk ekudksa }kjk visf{kr çdVhdj.k**

**4-2	ys[kk ekud 9 & jktLo fu/kkZj.k**

**4-3 ys[kk ekud 10 & laifÙk] la;a= vkSj midj.k**

fooj.k  ¼vkfLr oxZ½
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ
ifjlj
223.18
202.12

vU; vpy vkfLr;ka
578.66
551.95

iêk—r vkfLr;ka 
0.01
0.01

dEI;wVj l‚¶Vos;j
103.75
150.79

dqy
905.60
904.87

**4-4	ys[kk ekud 11& fons'kh fofue; njksa esa ifjorZu ds çHkko%**

fooj.k
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ
çkjafHkd tek
843.52
1008.10

3.10
6.05

30.39
79.26

vU; lek;kstu
0.00
-249.89

vafre 'ks"k
877.00
843.52

----

**4-5	 ys[kk ekud 15 ¼la'kksfèkr½ & deZpkjh ykHk%**

osru esa o`f) dh nj
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%
iyk;u nj
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%

 
 
isa'ku
minku
Nqêh udnhdj.k

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
çnÙk ykHk
-4170.79
-3719.34
-559.08
-625.83
-767.99
-721.44

**rkfydk III & ;kstuk vkfLr;ksa ds mfpr ewY; esa ifjorZu**

**rkfydk IV & ;kstuk vkfLr;ksa ds mfpr ewY; esa ifjorZu**

**;kstuk vkfLr;ksa ij okLrfod çfrykHk
4026.44
3542.29
322.36
306.03
306.26
259.76**

----

**4.5	 Accounting Standard 15 (Revised) – Employees Benefits:**

**DISCLOSURE IN ACCORDANCE WITH AS-15(R):**

In line with the accounting policy and as per the Accounting Standard – 15(R), the summarized position of employment benefits is as under:

**A.    Defined benefit Plans**

**TABLE I - Principal Actuarial Assumptions and the basis of these assumptions**

**Actuarial Assumptions
PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

Discount Rate
7.25%
7.45%
7.20%
7.45%
7.20%
7.45%

Expected Return on Plan Assets
7.25%
7.45%
7.20%
7.45%
7.20%
7.45%

Rate of Escalation In salary
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%
6.00%

Attrition Rate
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%

**TABLE II - Changes in Present value of the obligation
(ALL AMOUNTS IN CRORES)**

 
 
PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Present value of Obligation at the beginning of period
49177.52
48456.97
4119.93
4296.64
3901.33
3728.80

Add:
Interest Cost 
3544.18
3373.37
275.97
267.02
242.70
214.80

Add:
Current Service Cost
393.87
375.38
245.38
255.83
562.78
515.38

Less:
Past Service Cost
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.05
0.00

 
Benefits paid
-4170.79
-3719.34
-559.08
-625.83
-767.99
-721.44

 
Actuarial loss / (gain) on obligations (Balancing Figure)
3045.99
691.14
125.95
-73.73
97.44
163.76

**Present value of Obligation as at the end of the period
51990.77
49177.52
4208.16
4119.94
4036.32
3901.30**

**TABLE III - Changes in the FV of the Plan Assets**

 
PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Fair value of Plan Assets, at the beginning of period
49133.26
48147.78
4372.87
4339.26
3416.31
3122.19

Add:
Expected return on Plan assets
3540.89
3351.11
300.10
279.59
225.90
189.37

Add:
Contributions paid by Bank
1887.74
207.53
77.73
353.60
840.52
638.07

Add:
Contributions paid by Bank for Past Service Cost (on 
Family Pension liability)
0.00
955.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Less:
Benefits Paid
-4170.79
-3719.34
-556.69
-626.00
-643.53
-603.71

Actuarial (loss) / gain on Plan Assets (Balancing Figure)
485.55
191.18
22.26
26.44
80.36
70.39

**Fair value of Plan Assets as at the end of the period
50876.65
49133.26
4216.27
4372.89
3919.56
3416.31**

**TABLE IV - Changes in the FV of the Plan Assets**

 
 
PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Expected return on Plan Assets
3540.89
3351.11
300.1
279.59
225.90
189.37

Add:
Actuarial (loss) / gain on Plan Assets
485.55
191.18
22.26
26.44
80.36
70.39

**Actual Return on Plan Assets 
4026.44
3542.29
322.36
306.03
306.26
259.76**

----

**rkfydk V & fuoy chekafdd ¼ykHk½@gkfu fuèkkZfjr**

 
isa'ku
minku
Nqêh udnhdj.k
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
 
vofèk ds fy, chekafdd gkfu@¼ykHk½ & nkf;Ro
3045.99
691.14
123.824863
-74.306605
188.812735
163.118505

 
vofèk ds fy, chekafdd ¼ykHk½@gkfu & ;kstuk 
vkfLr;ksa
-485.55
-191.18
-19.7
-30.01
-80.36
-70.39

 
vofèk ds fy, dqy ¼ykHk½@gkfu
2560.44
499.96
104.12
-104.32
108.45
92.73

**vofèk esa fuèkkZfjr  chekafdd ¼ykHk½@gkfu
2560.44
499.96
104.12
-104.32
108.45
92.73**

 
o"kZ ds var esa xSj&fuèkkZfjr chekafdd ¼ykHk½@
gkfu
-
-
-
-
-
-

**rkfydk VI & rqyu i= esa fuèkkZfjr jkf'k**

 
?kkVk@¼vfèk'ks"k½
1114.12
44.26
-10.77
-255.42
116.16
484.56

 
xSj&fuèkkZfjr fiNyh lsok ykxr ¼QSfeyh isa'ku ns;rk ij½
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

**'kq) ns;rk@¼vkfLr½
1114.12
44.26
-10.77
-255.42
116.16
484.56**

**lkj.kh VII & ykHk vkSj gkfu ys[ks esa fuèkkZfjr O;;**

 
 
isa'ku
minku
Nqêh udnhdj.k

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

**rqyu i= esa jkf'k
2957.60
2417.76
324.95
138.62
687.83
633.45**

**rkfydk VIII & rqyu i= esa fuèkkZfjr dh tkus okyh 'kq) ns;rk esa lapyu**

----

**TABLE V - Net Actuarial (gain) / loss recognized**

 
PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Actuarial loss / (gain) for the period - Obligations 
3045.99
691.14
123.824863
-74.306605
188.812735
163.118505

 
Actuarial (gain)/ loss for the period - Plan Assets
-485.55
-191.18
-19.7
-30.01
-80.36
-70.39

 
Total (gain) /loss for the period
2560.44
499.96
104.12
-104.32
108.45
92.73

**Actuarial (gain)/ loss recognized in the period
2560.44
499.96
104.12
-104.32
108.45
92.73**

 
Unrecognized Actuarial (gain) / loss at the end 
of the year
-
-
-
-
-
-

**TABLE VI - Amount recognized in Balance Sheet**

 
PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Present value of Defined Benefit Obligation
51990.77
49177.52
4205.50
4117.45
4035.72
3900.87

Less:
Fair value of Plan Assets
50876.65
49133.26
4216.27
4372.87
3919.56
3416.31

 
Deficit/ (Surplus)
1114.12
44.26
-10.77
-255.42
116.16
484.56

 
Unrecognized Past Service cost (on Family Pension liability)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

**Net Liability/ (Asset)
1114.12
44.26
-10.77
-255.42
116.16
484.56**

 
Amounts in the Balance Sheet
 
 
 
 

Liability Recognized in the Balance Sheet
1114.12
44.26
-10.77
-255.42
116.16
484.56

Assets Recognized in the Balance Sheet (on Family 
Pension liability)
 
 
 
 
 
 

**Net Liability/ (Asset)
1114.12
44.26
-10.77
-255.42
116.16
484.56**

 
Negative amount determined under Paragraph 55 of AS-15 (R)
-
-
-
-
-
-

 
Present value of available refunds and  reductions in future  
contributions
-
-
-
-
-
-

 
Asset recognized as per Paragraph 59 (b) of AS-15 (R)
-
-
-
-
-
-

**TABLE VII - Expense to be recognized in Profit and loss Account**

 
 

**PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Present value of Defined Benefit Obligation
393.87
375.38
244.95
255.50
562.53
515.28

Add:
Fair value of Plan Assets
3544.18
3373.37
275.97
267.02
242.70
214.80

Less
Deficit/ (Surplus)
-3540.89
-3351.11
-300.1
-279.59
-225.90
-189.37

Add:
Unrecognized Past Service cost (on Family Pension liability)
2560.44
499.96
104.12
-104.32
108.45
92.73

Add:
Net Liability/ (Asset)
- 
1,520.16 
- 
 - 
 0.05 
- 

**Amounts in the Balance Sheet
2957.60
2417.76
324.95
138.62
687.83
633.45**

**TABLE VIII- Movement in Net Liability to be recognized in Balance Sheet**

 
PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Opening Net Liability
44.26
-1210.97
-207.14
7.14
375.34
507.52

Add:
Expense
2957.60
2417.76
296.67
91.47
469.48
505.93

Less: 
Contributions Paid
-1887.74
-1162.53
-77.73
-353.60
-840.52
-638.07

Less
Benefits Paid by the company
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.03

**Closing Net Liability/ (Asset) recognized in B/S in 
current period)
1114.12
44.26
11.79
-255.00
4.30
375.34**

----

**rkfydk IX & pkyw vofèk ds fy, jkf'k**

 
 
isa'ku
minku
Nqêh udnhdj.k

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

**vfèk'ks"k@¼?kkVk½
-1114.12
-44.26
8.11
252.95
-116.76
-484.99**

 
;kstuk ns;rkvksa esa  vkuqHkfod lek;kstu & gkfu@¼ykHk½
4214.80
1763.45
47.87
31.43
110.94
213.31

 
;kstuk vkfLr;ksa esa lek;kstu & ¼gkfu½@ykHk
485.55
191.18
22.26
31.39
80.36
70.39

**rkfydk XI & vkxkeh o"kZ ds nkSjku m|e ds va'knku dk Js"Bre vuqeku**

**fooj.k**

**Nqêh fdjk;k fj;k;r 
¼xSj&fufèkd½
flYoj tqcyh cksul 
¼xSj&fufèkd½**

----

**TABLE IX - Amount for the current Period**

 
 

**PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

 
Present value of Obligation
51990.77
49177.52
4208.16
4119.94
4036.32
3901.30

 Less
Fair value of Plan Assets
50876.65
49133.26
4216.27
4372.89
3919.56
3416.31

**Surplus / (Deficit) 
-1114.12
-44.26
8.11
252.95
-116.76
-484.99**

 
Experience Adjustments in Plan Liabilities -loss / (gain)
4214.80
1763.45
47.87
31.43
110.94
213.31

 
Experience Adjustments in Plan Assets  (loss) / gain 
485.55
191.18
22.26
31.39
80.36
70.39

**TABLE X - Major Categories of Plan Assets (as percentage of Total Plan Assets) as managed by Trust  (Parent Company)**

 
 
PENSION
GRATUITY
LEAVE ENCASHMENT

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

Government Of India Securities
2.80%
3.00%
4.93%
4.85%
0.00%
0.00%

State Govt. Securities
9.48%
10.05%
7.64%
5.90%
0.00%
0.00%

High Quality Corporate Bonds
5.77%
5.85%
2.97%
3.28%
0.00%
0.00%

Equity Shares of listed companies/Mutual fund investments
0.23%
0.24%
0.54%
0.41%
0.00%
0.00%

Property
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

Special deposit scheme/FDR’s
3.27%
2.47%
5.07%
3.80%
0.00%
0.00%

Funds managed by Insurer/ Investment in Life Insurance Companies
75.12%
75.81%
75.36%
71.82%
100.00%
100.00%

Other Deposits, Accruals etc.
3.33%
2.58%
3.49%
9.94%
0.00%
0.00%

**TOTAL
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%**

**TABLE XI - Enterprise’s Best Estimate of Contribution during Next Year**

**Pension (Funded)
Gratuity (Funded)
Leave Encashment 
(Funded)**

**31.03.2025
31.03.2024
31.03.2025
31.03.2024
31.03.2025
31.03.2024**

Bank’s best estimate of Contribution  during next year
1950.00
890.00
240.08
210.09
510.08
440.08

**TABLE XII - Other Long Term employee benefits (Unfunded)**

**Particulars
Sick Leave & Other 
Leaves (Unfunded)
Leave Fare concession 
(unfunded)
Silver Jubilee Bonus 
(unfunded)**

**31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023
31.03.2024
31.03.2023**

Present Value of Obligation
1207.03
216.35
91.68
257.64
22.11
20.24

Opening Balance of Transitional Liability
-
-
-
-
-
-

Transitional Liability recognized in the year
-
-
-
-
-
-

Closing Balance Of Transitional Liability
-
-
-
-
-
-

**Liability Recognized in balance Sheet 
1207.03
216.35
91.68
257.64
22.11
20.24**

**Particulars
Basis of assumption**

Discount Rate
Discount Rate has been determined by reference to market yields at the balance Sheet date on Government 
bonds (published by FBIL) of term consistent with currency and estimated term of the obligations.

Expected Rate of Return on Plan Assets
It is assumed that return on the plan assets pertaining to the Pension will be 7.25% and for Gratuity and 
Leave Encashment fund will be 7.20% p.a. 

Salary Escalation Rate (SER)
Based on the broad guidance provided by IBA, SER for the bank has been taken at 6.00% p.a. 

**Attrition Rate
Attrition rate is assumed at 1% taken with reference to past experience and expected future 
experience related to voluntary withdrawals.**

----

**4.5	   i)   Defined Contribution Plans (Parent Company): -**

The Bank has Defined Contribution Plan applicable to all categories 
of employees joining the Bank on or after 01.04.2010. The 
scheme is managed by NPS trust under the aegis of the Pension 
Fund Regulatory and Development Authority. National Securities 
Depository Limited (Protean eGov Technologies Limited) has been 
appointed as the Central Record Keeping Agency for the NPS. The 
details of contribution are as under: -

During the FY 2023-24 = ₹1382.37 Crores 

During the FY 2022-23 = ₹1220.32 Crores

**4.6	  Accounting Standard 17 - Segment Reporting**

 Segment Identification

**I.	
Primary (Business Segment):**

The following are the primary segments of the Bank:-

i)	
Treasury: The Treasury Segment includes the entire 
investment portfolio and trading in foreign exchange contracts 
and derivative contracts. The revenue of the treasury segment 
primarily consists of fees and gains or losses from trading 
operations and interest income on the investment portfolio.

ii)	
Corporate / Wholesale Banking: As per the RBI guidelines 
RBI/2020-21/53, 
DOR.No.BP.BC.23/21.06.201/2020-21, 
dated 12th October 2020, the Corporate / Wholesale Banking 
segment comprises the lending activities of borrowers having 
exposure of ₹7.50Crores and above.

iii)	
Retail Banking: The Retail Banking Segment comprises of 
borrower accounts having exposure of less than ₹7.50Crores. 

iv)	 Other Banking Operations Segments not classified under (i) 
to (iii) above are classified under this primary segment.

**II	
Secondary (Geographical Segment):**

i)	
Domestic Operations: Branches/Offices having operations in 
India

ii)	
Foreign Operations: Branches/Offices having operations 
outside India and offshore banking units having operations in 
India.

**III.	 Basis of allocation**

	
The interest income is allocated on the basis of actual interest 
received from different segments

	
Expenses not directly attributable are allocated on the basis 
of Interest income earned by the wholesale banking / retail 
banking segment/other banking segment

	
Capital employed for each segment is calculated based on the 
assets and liabilities of that particular segment

	
The Bank has certain common assets and liabilities, which 
cannot be attributed to any segment, and the same are treated 
as unallocated.

**4-6	 ys[kk ekud 17 & [kaMokj jsiksÉVx**

**[kaMokj igpku**

**II	 f}rh;d ¼HkkSxksfyd [kaM½%**

i½	 ?kjsyw ifjpkyu% Hkkjr esa ifjpkyu djus okyh 'kk[kk,¡@dk;kZy;

Contribution 
includes both 
Bank + Employee 
contribution  

**;ksxnku esa cSad $ 
deZpkjh nksuksa dk 
;ksxnku 'kkfey gS**

----

**PART  A – BUSINESS SEGMENTS**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Sr. 
No.
Particulars
Year Ended**

**31.03.2024 
Audited
31.03.2023 
Audited**

1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

**Segment Revenue**

(a) Treasury Operations
33002.49
28123.94

(b) Corporate/Wholesale Banking
51947.45
40732.73

(c) Retail Banking
34973.38
27071.27

   1) Digital Banking
0.13
0.02

   2) Other Retail Banking
34973.25
27071.25

(d) Other Banking Operations
2470.69
3156.94

**Total Revenue
122394.01
99084.88**

2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

**Segment Results**

(a) Treasury Operations
7538.00
7185.00

(b) Corporate/Wholesale Banking
4634.24
-2816.51

(c) Retail Banking
5756.92
3920.39

   1) Digital Banking
-6.39
-4.35

   2) Other Retail Banking
5763.31
3924.74

(d) Other Banking Operations
751.03
1128.64

Total 
18680.19
9417.52

Unallocated Expenditure
5348.48
4556.10

Provisions & Contingencies

Profit before Tax
13331.71
4861.42

Provision for Tax
5002.80
1792.08

Extraordinary items
0.00
0.00

Share of Earning in Associates(Net)
828.24
289.44

Minority Interest
49.95
10.33

Net profit
9107.20
3348.45

3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

**Segment Assets**

(a) Treasury Operations
496903.42
490396.13

(b) Corporate/Wholesale Banking
668803.90
604518.31

(c) Retail Banking
345192.68
302145.46

   1) Digital Banking
2.30
1.86

   2) Other Retail Banking
345190.38
302143.60

(d) Other Banking Operations
43710.78
49526.55

(e) Unallocated
44025.18
47062.49

Total 
1598635.96
1493648.94

4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

**Segment Liabilities**

(a) Treasury Operations
471888.14
468241.16

(b) Corporate/Wholesale Banking
641942.73
582274.16

(c) Retail Banking
331892.60
292978.42

   1) Digital Banking
21.44
6.09

   2) Other Retail Banking
331871.16
292972.33

(d) Other Banking Operations
40268.67
46056.66

(e) Unallocated
2257.09
1218.04

Total 
1488249.23
1390768.44

**Ø-  
la-
fooj.k
lekIr o"kZ
31.03.2024 
ys[kkijhf{kr**

**31.03.2023 
ys[kkijhf{kr**

1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

**[kaM jktLo**

   1) fMftVy cSaÇdx 
0.13
0.02

2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   1) fMftVy cSaÇdx 
-6.39
-4.35

3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   1) fMftVy cSaÇdx 
2.30
1.86

4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   1) fMftVy cSaÇdx 
21.44
6.09

----

5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

**Capital Employed**

(a) Treasury Operations
25015.28
22154.97

(b) Corporate/Wholesale Banking
26861.17
22244.15

(c) Retail Banking
13300.08
9167.04

   1) Digital Banking
-19.14
-4.23

   2) Other Retail Banking
13319.22
9171.27

(d) Other Banking Operations
3442.11
3469.89

(e) Unallocated
41768.09
45844.45

Total Capital Employed
110386.73
102880.50

**PART B - GEOGRAPHICAL SEGMENTS**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Sr. 
No.
Particulars**

**CONSOLIDATED**

**Year Ended**

**31.03.2024 
Audited
31.03.2023 
Audited**

1
 
 
 

**Revenue**

(a) Domestic
117982.87
96537.10

(b) International
4411.14
2547.78

**Total
122394.01
99084.88**

2
 
 
 

**Assets**

(a) Domestic
1516423.79
1420938.21

(b) International
82212.17
72710.73

**Total
1598635.96
1493648.94**

**Notes :**

1.	 Segment Liabilities are distributed in the ratio of their respective 
Segment Assets.

2.	 Figures of the previous period have been re-grouped/re-classified 
wherever necessary.

3. 	 As per RBI Circular RBI/2022-23/19 DOR.AUT.REC. 12/22.01.001/2022-
23 dated April 07, 2022, for the purpose of disclosure under Accounting 
Standard 17, Segment Reporting, Digital Banking Segment has been 
identified as sub-segment under Retail Banking by Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI). As on March 31, 2024, 8 (eight) Digital Banking Units (DBUs) 
of the Bank have commenced operations and the segment information 
disclosed as Digital Banking under Retail Banking Operations is related 
to the said DBUs.

**4.7	 Accounting Standard 18 - Disclosure of Related Parties 
as per Accounting Standard –18 issued by ICAI: (Parent 
Company)**

**Names of the related parties and their relationship with the 
Bank:**

**Key Management Personnel (KMP):**

**i)	
Shri Atul Kumar Goel, Managing Director & CEO**

**ii)	
Shri Vijay Dube, Executive Director up to 31.08.2023***

**iii)	
Shri Kalyan Kumar, Executive Director**

**iv)	 Shri Binod Kumar, Executive Director**

**v)	
Shri M. Paramasivam, Executive Director**

**vi)	 Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra, Executive Director**

* Tenure completed on 31.08.2023

5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   1) fMftVy cSaÇdx 
-19.14
-4.23

**Ø-la-
fooj.k	
lesfdr
lekfIr o"kZ
31.03.2024 
ys[kkijhf{kr**

31.03.2023 
ys[kkijhf{kr
1
 
 
 

**jktLo**

¼,½ ?kjsyw
117982.87
96537.10

¼ch½ varjjk"Vªh;
4411.14
2547.78

**dqy
122394.01
99084.88**

2
 
 
 

**vkfLr;ka**

¼,½ ?kjsyw
1516423.79
1420938.21

¼ch½ varjjk"Vªh;
82212.17
72710.73

**dqy
1598635.96
1493648.94**

**uksV%**

**ii½	
Jh fot; nqcs] dk;Zikyd funs'kd fnukad 31-08-2023* rd**

**iii½	 Jh dY;k.k dqekj] dk;Zikyd funs'kd**

**iv½	 Jh fcuksn dqekj] dk;Zikyd funs'kd**

**v½	
Jh ,e- ijef'koe] dk;Zikyd funs'kd**

**vi½	 Jh fcHkq çlkn egkik=] dk;Zikyd funs'kd**

* fnukad 31-08-2023 dks dk;Zdky lekIr

----

**Subsidiaries:**

i)	
PNB Gilts Ltd.

ii)	
PNB Investment Services Ltd.

iii)	
PNB Cards and Services Ltd.

iv)	 Punjab National Bank (International) Ltd., UK.

v)	
Druk PNB Bank Ltd, Bhutan.

**Associates:**

i)	
PNB Metlife India Insurance Co. Ltd*

ii)	
PNB Housing Finance Limited

iii)	
JSC (Tengri Bank), Almaty, Kazakhstan**

iv)	 Canara HSBC Life Insurance Co. Ltd.

v)	
India SME Asset Reconstruction Co. Ltd.

vi)	 Everest Bank Limited, Kathmandu, Nepal

vii)	 Dakshin Bihar Gramin Bank, Patna

viii)	 Himachal Pradesh Gramin Bank, Mandi

ix)	 Punjab Gramin Bank, Kapurthala

x)	
Sarva Haryana Gramin Bank, Rohtak

xi)	 Prathama UP Gramin Bank, Moradabad

xii)	 Assam Gramin Vikas Bank, Guwahati

xiii)	 Bangiya Gramin Vikas Bank, West Bengal

xiv)	 Manipur Rural Bank, Imphal

xv)	 Tripura Gramin Bank, Agartala

*PNB has acquired 30% stake in PNB Metlife at a consideration of  
Rs. 700.48 as brand equity.

**AFR revoked license of JSC Tengri Bank w.e.f. 18.09.2020 and is under 
Liquidation.

**Others:**

**i)	
PNB Centenary Rural Development Trust**

**leuq"kaxh%**

	
i½	
ih,uch fxYV~l fy-

	
ii½	
ih,uch bUosLVesaV lÆolst fy- 

	
iii½	 ih,uch dkM~lZ ,aM lÆolst fy-

	
iv½	 iatkc uS'kuy cSad ¼baVjus'kuy½ fy-] ;wds

	
v½	
Mªd ih,uch cSad fy-] HkwVku

**lg;ksxh%**

	
i½	
ih,uch esVykbQ bafM;k bU';ksjsal daiuh*

	
ii½	
ih,uch gkmÇlx Qkbusal fyfeVsM 

	
iv½	 dsujk] ,p,lchlh] ykbQ bU';ksjsal daiuh fy-

	
v½	
Hkkjr ,l,eÃ vkfLr iquÆuekZ.k da- fy- 

	
vii½	 nf{k.k fcgkj xzkeh.k cSad] iVuk 

	
viii½	 fgekpy çns'k] xzkeh.k cSad] eaMh

	
ix½	 iatkc xzkeh.k cSad] diwjFkyk 

	
x½	
loZ gfj;k.kk xzkeh.k cSad] jksgrd 

	
xi½	 çFkek ;wih xzkeh.k cSad] eqjknkckn 

	
xii½	 vle xzkeh.k fodkl cSad] xqokgkVh 

	
xiii½	 cafx;k xzkeh.k fodkl cSad] if'pe caxky 

	
xiv½	 ef.kiqj xzkeh.k cSad] bEQky 

	
xv½	 f=iqjk xzkeh.k cSad] vxjryk

**vU;%**

**i½ ih,uch 'krkCnh xzkeh.k fodkl VªLV**

----

ikfjJfed
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
-
 2.40
-
2.40
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
-
(2.54)
-
(2.54)
mèkkj

o"kZ ds var rd cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
24.98
-
-
24.98
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(25.00)
-
-
(25.00)

o"kZ ds nkSjku vfèkdre cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
24.98
-
-
24.98
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(25.00)
-
-
(25.00)
tekjkf'k

o"kZ ds var esa cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
892.02
-
-
892.02
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(1,079.87)
-
-
(1,079.87)

o"kZ ds var esa cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
2.12
-
-
2.12
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(0.64)
-
-
(0.64)

o"kZ ds nkSjku vfèkdre cdk;k jkf'k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
2.12
-
-
2.12
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(2.77)
-
-
(2.77)
vfxze ¼vU;½

o"kZ ds var esa cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
2,691.63
-
-
2,691.63
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(4,636.68)
-
-
(4,636.68)

o"kZ ds nkSjku vfèkdre cdk;k jkf'k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
4,892.67
-
-
4,892.67
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(4,651.76)
-
-
(4,651.76)
fuos'k

o"kZ ds var esa cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
1,316.29
-
-
1,316.29
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(817.54)
-
-
(817.54)

o"kZ ds var esa cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
104.41
-
-
104.41
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(84.70)
-
-
(84.70)

o"kZ ds var esa cdk;k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
8.92
-
-
8.92
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(7.63)
-
-
(7.63)

o"kZ ds nkSjku vfèkdre cdk;k jkf'k
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
8.92
-
-
8.92
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(7.63)
-
-
(7.63)

iznÙk C;kt & vU;
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
2.12
-
-
2.12
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(9.45)
-
-
(9.45)

C;kt çkIr & vU;	
 
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
555.96
-
-
555.96
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(556.62)
-
-
(556.62)

çcaèku lafonk,¡
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
0.54
-
-
0.54
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(0.54)
-
-
(0.54)

cSad çHkkj	
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
1.12
-
-
1.12
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(1.26)
-
-
(1.26)

vU; O;;
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
37.73
-
-
37.73
ykxw ugh
ykxw ugh
(5.42)
-
-
(5.42)

----

**Transactions with Related Parties: 
(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Particulars
Parent** (as per 
ownership or 
control)**

**Subsidiaries**
Associates/ 
Joint ventures
Key 
Management 
Personnel**

**Relatives of Key 
Management 
Personnel**

**Total**

Remuneration 
 NA 
 NA 
-
 2.40
-
2.40
 NA 
 NA 
-
(2.54)
-
(2.54)
Borrowings

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
24.98
-
-
24.98
 NA 
 NA 
(25.00)
-
-
(25.00)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
24.98
-
-
24.98
 NA 
 NA 
(25.00)
-
-
(25.00)
Deposits

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
892.02
-
-
892.02
 NA 
 NA 
(1,079.87)
-
-
(1,079.87)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
1,135.78
-
-
1,135.78
 NA 
 NA 
(1,134.32)
-
-
(1,134.32)
Other Liabilities

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
2.12
-
-
2.12
 NA 
 NA 
(0.64)
-
-
(0.64)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
2.12
-
-
2.12
 NA 
 NA 
(2.77)
-
-
(2.77)
Advances (Others)

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
2,691.63
-
-
2,691.63
 NA 
 NA 
(4,636.68)
-
-
(4,636.68)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
4,892.67
-
-
4,892.67
 NA 
 NA 
(4,651.76)
-
-
(4,651.76)
Investments

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
1,316.29
-
-
1,316.29
 NA 
 NA 
(817.54)
-
-
(817.54)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
1,316.29
-
-
1,316.29
 NA 
 NA 
(817.54)
-
-
(817.54)
Other Assets

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
104.41
-
-
104.41
 NA 
 NA 
(84.70)
-
-
(84.70)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
121.58
-
-
121.58
 NA 
 NA 
(152.03)
-
-
(152.03)
Non funded Commitments (LCs/BGs)

Outstanding as at the year end
 NA 
 NA 
8.92
-
-
8.92
 NA 
 NA 
(7.63)
-
-
(7.63)

Maximum outstanding during the year
 NA 
 NA 
8.92
-
-
8.92
 NA 
 NA 
(7.63)
-
-
(7.63)

Interest Paid Others
 NA 
 NA 
2.12
-
-
2.12
 NA 
 NA 
(9.45)
-
-
(9.45)

Interest received Others
 NA 
 NA 
555.96
-
-
555.96
 NA 
 NA 
(556.62)
-
-
(556.62)

Management contracts
 NA 
 NA 
0.54
-
-
0.54
 NA 
 NA 
(0.54)
-
-
(0.54)

Bank Charges
 NA 
 NA 
1.12
-
-
1.12
 NA 
 NA 
(1.26)
-
-
(1.26)

Other Expenditure
 NA 
 NA 
37.73
-
-
37.73
 NA 
 NA 
(5.42)
-
-
(5.42)

Other Income
 NA 
 NA 
393.53
-
-
393.53
 NA 
 NA 
(322.55)
-
-
(322.55)

Notes:	 1.	 **The transactions with the subsidiaries and certain associates have not been disclosed in view of para-9 of AS-18 ‘Related Party Disclosure’, which 
exempts state controlled enterprises from making any disclosures pertaining to their transactions with other related parties, which are also state 
controlled. 

	
2.	 Further, in terms of Paragraph 5 of AS 18, transactions in the nature of Banker-Customer relationship have not been disclosed including those with 
Key Management Personnel and relatives of Key Management Personnel.

	
3.	 The amounts reported are net of provision, if any.

	
4.	 Figures in brackets relate to previous year and have been regrouped / rearranged / reclassified wherever necessary.

----

**4.8. 	Accounting Standard 19 - Lease (Parent Company)**

**i.	
Operating lease primarily comprise office premises, which are 
renewable at the option of the bank normally at the end of 
every 3rd / 5th year.**

**ii.	
As per information available, Non-Cancellable lease as on 
31.03.2024: NIL (Previous year: NIL).**

**iii.	
Bank has created lease equalization reserve for Rs. 21.70 Cr. 
on the straight line method for the period ended March 2024.**

**iv.	
Amount of lease payment recognized in P & L Account for 
operating lease is as under:**

**Current Year Ended 31.03.2024
Previous Year Ended 31.03.2023**

No. of lease / 
rented premises
(Amount in 
₹Crore)
No. of lease / 
rented premises
(Amount in 
₹Crore)

15912
814.59
15813
802.06

**4.9 Accounting Standard 20 - Earnings per Share**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

Earnings per Share
Basic
8.27
3.04

Diluted 
8.27
3.04

Amount used as numerator Profit 
after tax (Rs. In Crore) 
9107.20
3348.45

Nominal value of shares
₹2.00 each
₹2.00 each

Weighted average number of equity 
shares used as the denominator
11011015558
11011015558

**4.10	 Major components of deferred tax assets and liability are  
	
 set out below:**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

**Deferred Tax Assets**

Provision for bad & doubtful debts
23107.94
24319.77

Provision for leave encashment
427.14
138.28

Provision for Pension & Gratuity
0.04
0.04

Taxable Loss (Carried Forward)
208.43
208.77

Pre-Incorporation Expenditure
0.00
0.00

Depreciation on fixed assets
2.20
0.33

Others Contingencies
262.44
250.77

**Total
24008.20
24917.96**

**Deferred Tax Liabilities**

Depreciation on fixed assets
-335.24
-304.79

Deduction u/s 36(1)(viii)of Income- tax 
Act,1961
1388.02
1249.26

Others 
0.00
0.00

**Total
1052.78
944.47**

**Deferred Tax Assets/ (Liability) – Net
22955.42
23973.49**

**4-8-  ys[kkadu ekud 19 & iêk ¼ewy daiuh½**

**fooj.k	
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

çfr 'ks;j vtZu	
ewy
8.27
3.04

ºzkflr
8.27
3.04

**dj ds i'pkr~ x.kd ds :i esa mi;ksx 
dh xÃ jkf'k ¼djksM+ #i;s esa½**

9107.20
3348.45

11011015558
11011015558

Nqêh udnhdj.k ds fy, çkoèkku
427.14
138.28

isa'ku ,oa xzsP;qVh ds fy, çkoèkku	
0.04
0.04

dj ;ksX; gkfu ¼vkxs ys tk;k x;k½
208.43
208.77

fuxeu&iwoZ O;;
0.00
0.00

vpy vkfLr;ksa ij ewY;ºzkl
2.20
0.33

vU; vkdfLedrk,¡
262.44
250.77

**dqy
24008.20
24917.96**

vkLFkfxr dj ns;rk,a	
vpy vkfLr;ksa ij ewY;ºzkl
-335.24
-304.79

1388.02
1249.26

vU;	
0.00
0.00

**dqy
1052.78
944.47**

**vkLFkfxr dj vkfLr;ka@¼ns;rk,a½ & 
fuoy**

**22955.42
23973.49**

----

**4.11   Accounting Standard 28 - Impairment of Assets**

**A substantial portion of the bank’s assets comprises ‘financial 
assets’ to which Accounting Standard 28 ‘Impairment of Assets’ is 
Not Applicable. In the opinion of the bank, there is no impairment of 
its assets (to which the standard applies) to any material extent as 
at 31.03.2024 requiring recognition in terms of the said standard.**

**(Previous year: A substantial portion of the bank’s assets comprises 
‘financial assets’ to which Accounting Standard 28 ‘Impairment of 
Assets’ is Not Applicable. In the opinion of the bank, there is no 
impairment of its assets (to which the standard applies) to any 
material extent as at 31.03.2023 requiring recognition in terms of 
the said standard).**

**4.12	 Accounting Standard 29 - Provisions, Contingent  
	
   Liabilities and Contingent Assets**

**i.	
Movement of provisions for liabilities***

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Particulars
Salary arrears 
under negotiation
Legal cases/ 
contingencies**

Balance as at 1st April 2023
459.63 
(0.00)
85.58
(83.51)

Provided during the year
2041.73
(459.63)
43.30
(4.98)

Amounts used/Reversed 
during the year
2351.35
(0.00)
9.23
(2.91)

Balance as at 31.03.2024
150.00
(459.63)
119.65
 (85.58)

Timing of outflow/uncertainties
On actual  
Payment
Outflow on 
settlement / 
crystallization

On actual  
Payment
Outflow on 
settlement / 
crystallization

*Excluding provisions for others

**ii	
Break-up of “Provisions and Contingencies” shown under 
the head Expenditure in Profit and Loss Account is as follows:**

**(Amount in ₹ Crore)**

**Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year**

Provisions for NPI 
-1407.33
173.22

Provision towards NPAs 
12171.97
15828.44

Floating provisions for NPAs 
(over and above RBI provisioning 
norms)

150.00
0.00

Provision towards Standard Assets
6.33
1786.56

Provision made towards Income

Current Tax

Deferred Tax

5002.80

3984.74

1018.06

1792.08

62.27

1729.81

Other Provisions & Contingencies
798.19
282.56

**Total
16721.96
19862.86**

**4-11  ys[kkadu ekud 28 & vkfLr;ksa dk ºzkl**

**fooj.k
ckrphr ds vèkhu 
cdk;k osru
dkuwuh ekeys@
vkdfLedrk,¡**

1 vçSy 2023 dks 'ks"k
459.63 
(0.00)
85.58
(83.51)

o"kZ ds nkSjku çnku fd;k x;k
2041.73
(459.63)
43.30
(4.98)

o"kZ ds nkSjku ç;qä@jkf'k;k¡
2351.35
(0.00)
9.23
(2.91)

31-03-2024 dks 'ks"k
150.00
(459.63)
119.65
 (85.58)
cfgokZg@vfuf'prrkvksa dk 
le;
okLrfod  
Hkqxrku ij
fuiVku@fØLVyhdj.k 
ij cfgokZg

**okLrfod  
Hkqxrku ij
fuiVku@fØLVyhdj.k 
ij cfgokZg**

*vU; ds fy, çkoèkku dks NksM+dj

**fooj.k
pkyw o"kZ
xr o"kZ**

,uihvkÃ ds fy, çkoèkku
-1407.33
173.22

,uih, ds fy, çkoèkku
12171.97
15828.44

150.00
0.00

ekud vkfLr;ksa ds fy, çkoèkku
6.33
1786.56

**vk; ds fy, fd;k x;k çkoèkku 
orZeku dj
vkLFkfxr dj**

5002.80

3984.74

1018.06

1792.08

62.27

1729.81

vU; çkoèkku ,oa vkdfLedrk,¡
798.19
282.56

**dqy
16721.96
19862.86**

----

**4.13   Refer Schedule-12 on Contingent Liabilities**

Such liabilities are dependent upon the outcome of Court/arbitration/
out of court settlement, disposal of appeals, and the amount being 
called up, terms of contractual obligations, devolvement and raising 
of demand by concerned parties, respectively.

**4.14   Break-up of Floating Provisions is as follows:**

(Amount in ₹ Crore)

Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year

Opening balance 
0.00
0.00

Quantum of floating provisions 
made during the  year
150.00
0.00

Purpose and amount of draw down 
made during the  year
0.00
0.00

Closing balance
150.00
0.00

**4.15	   Disclosure: Letter of Comfort (LoC)**

a.	
Regarding RRBs

	
As on 31.03.2024, PNB (as a Sponsor Bank) has issued 
Letters of Comfort in favour of Micro Units Development & 
Refinance Agency Limited (MUDRA Ltd.) on behalf of Assam 
Gramin Vikash Bank (AGVB) and Manipur Rural Bank (MRB) 
for enabling these Sponsored RRBs to become Member 
Lending Institutions (MLIs) for MUDRA Loans. 

	
On the basis of financials of the above RRBs for FY 2023 
and Letter of Comfort issued by us, MUDRA worked out the 
exposure limits for AGVB and MRB and these RRBs were 
accepted as MLI up to the exposure limit under MUDRA for 
Rs. 56.79 Crore and Rs. 1.92 Crore respectively. Further, 
the banks AGVB and MRB have not availed any refinance 
from MUDRA as on 31.03.2024. Hence, there is no financial 
impact.

b.	
Regarding Subsidiaries and other Associates:

	
The Bank has issued a Letter of Comfort to Prudential 
Regulation Authority (PRA), the regulator in United Kingdom, 
committing that the bank shall provide financial support to its 
subsidiary, Punjab National Bank (International) Ltd., UK so 
that it meets its financial commitments as and when they fall 
due.

	
The said Letter of Comfort has been renewed on 15.03.2022 
after seeking approval of our Board in favor of PRA w.r.t. 
our subsidiary PNBIL wherein we have reiterated our 
commitment. The renewal was done as per instruction of PRA 
and RBI. Further, Annual assessment of impact of LOC was 
approved by the Board in its meeting held on 28.03.2024, as 
per which the Bank does not foresee any crystallization of 
financial obligation. Therefore, there is no financial impact on 
account of this LOC for FY 2023-24.

Apart from the above, the Bank has not issued any Letter of Comfort 
to Group Entities (subsidiaries and associates).

**4-13  vkdfLed ns;rkvksa ij vuqlwph&12 dk lanHkZ ysa**

**4-14	  ¶yksÇVx çkoèkkuksa dk fooj.k bl çdkj gS%**

¼jkf'k ₹ djksM+ esa½

150.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

tek 'ks"k
150.00
0.00

**4-15  çdVhdj.k% pqdkSrh vk'oklu i= ¼,yvkslh½**

**d-	 vkjvkjch ds lacaèk esa**

**[k-	 lgk;d daifu;ksa vkSj vU; lg;ksfx;ksa ds lacaèk esa%**

----

**4.16   Disclosure:  Letter of Undertaking**

**The Bank has provided a Letter of Undertaking for PNB IBU Gift 
City Branch under Regulation 3(3) of International Financial Service 
Centre Authority(IFSCA) that:**

**“Bank will provide support and assistance (including liquidity, 
whenever needed) and as may be appropriate to enable the 
banking unit to meet its obligations in the course of its obligation”.**

**Apart from the above the Bank has not issued any Letter of Comfort 
for overseas branches and there are no cumulative financial 
obligations under Letter of Comfort.**

**4.17 The Consolidated financial results are prepared in 
accordance with Accounting Standard 21 on “Consolidated 
Financial Statements”, Accounting Standard 23 on “Accounting for 
Investment in Associates in Consolidated Financial Statements” 
and Accounting Standard 27 on “Financial Reporting of Interest in 
Joint Ventures” issued by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
India and guidelines issued by RBI.**

**4.19   Fraud accounts**

Particulars
Current Year
Previous Year

Number of frauds 
reported
Borrowal
52
164

Non Borrowal
79
125

Digital Fraud
6981
00

TOTAL
7112
289

Amount involved in 
fraud (₹ crore)
Borrowal
1752.91
1580.46

Non Borrowal
31.25
228.64

Digital Fraud
19.43
0.00

TOTAL
1803.59
1809.10

Amount of provision 
made for such frauds 
(₹ crore)

Borrowal*
1425.70
1578.46

Non Borrowal
16.97
224.22

Digital Fraud
0.00
0.00

TOTAL
1442.67
1802.68

Amount of Un-
amortised provision 
debited from ‘other 
reserves’ as at the end 
of the year. (₹ crore)

-
-
1028.95

*Amount outstanding as on 31.03.2024 the Borrowal Fraud is Rs. 1425.70 crore.

**5.1	 Figures of the previous year have been regrouped / rearranged 
/ reclassified wherever necessary to conform to current 
period’s classification.**

**5.2	 Figures in the bracket wherever given relates to previous year.**

**4-16  çdVhdj.k% opu i=**

**4-19  èkks[kkèkM+h [kkrs**

xSj mèkkj
79
125

fMftVy èkks[kkèkM+h
6981
00

dqy
7112
289

èkks[kkèkM+h esa 'kkfey 
jkf'k ¼₹ djksM+½
mèkkj
1752.91
1580.46

xSj mèkkj
31.25
228.64

fMftVy èkks[kkèkM+h
19.43
0.00

dqy
1803.59
1809.10

,slh èkks[kkèkfM+;ksa ds 
fy, fd;s x, çkoèkku 
dh jkf'k ¼₹ djksM+½

mèkkj*
1425.70
1578.46

xSj mèkkj
16.97
224.22

fMftVy èkks[kkèkM+h
0.00
0.00

dqy
1442.67
1802.68

-
-
1028.95

* 31-03-2024 rd mèkkj èkks[kkèkM+h dh cdk;k jkf'k 1425-70 djksM+ #i;s gSA

----

**31 ekpZ] 2024 dks lekIr o"kZ ds fy, lesfdr udnh çokg dk fooj.k 
STATEMENT OF CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 31, 2024**

 ¼jkf'k djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore) 

**fooj.k**

**Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks lekIr o"kZ 
Year ended 31.03.2024
31-03-2023 dks lekIr o"kZ 
Year ended 31.03.2023**

**,-	
ifjpkyu dk;Zdykiksa ls udnh çokg
A.	
Cash Flow from Operating Activities**

**dj ds i'pkr fuoy ykHk@¼gkfu½**

	
Net Profit/(Loss) after Tax
 9107.20 
 
3348.45 

**dj ds fy, çkoèkku**

	
Provision for Tax

 
5002.80 
 
1792.08 

**(I)	
dj ls iwoZ fuoy ykHk 
Net Profit before tax**

**(i)
 14110.00 
 5140.53**

**(II)	
fuEufyf[kr ds fy, lek;kstu% 
Adjustments for:**

	
vpy vkfLr;ksa ij ewY;ºzkl 
Depreciation on fixed assets
 905.60 
 904.87 

	
fuos'k [fuoy] ij ewY;ºzkl@¼fjyht+½ 
Depreciation/(Release) on Investments [net]
 
(742.12)
 1966.77 

	
vutZd vkfLr;ksa ds fy, çkoèkku 
Provisions for non performing assets
 
12321.98 
 15828.44 

	
ekud vkfLr;ksa ij çkoèkku 
Provision on Standard Assets
 91.85 
 1311.62 

	
vU; çkoèkku ¼fuoy½ 
Other Provision (net)
 712.67 
 757.50 

	
,lksfl,V~l esa miktZu dk 'ks;j 
Shares of earning in Associates
 (803.22)
 (289.44)

	
vpy vkfLr;ksa ¼fuoy½ dh fcØh ls ykHk@gkfu  
Profit / Loss on sale of Fixed Assets (net)
 (6.66)
 (2.58)

	
c‚.M ij çnÙk C;kt 
Interest paid on Bonds
 2970.10 
 2467.94 

	
mi tksM+ 
Sub Total
(ii)
 15450.20 
 22945.12 

**(III)	 fuEufyf[kr ds fy, lek;kstu% 
Adjustment for:**

	
fuos'kksa esa ºzkl@¼o`f)½ 
Decrease/(Increase) in Investments
 (27599.32)
 (29448.23)

	
vfxzeksa esa ºzkl@¼o`f)½ 
Decrease/(Increase) in Advances
 (116625.46)
 (118492.65)

	
vU; vkfLr;ksa esa ºzkl@¼o`f)½ 
Decrease/(Increase) in Other Assets
 62.90 
 1130.00 

	
tek jkf'k;ksa esa o`f)@¼ºzkl½ 
Increase/(Decrease) in Deposits
 88878.16 
 136112.62 

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

**fooj.k**

**Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks lekIr o"kZ 
Year ended 31.03.2024
31-03-2023 dks lekIr o"kZ 
Year ended 31.03.2023**

	
mèkkjksa esa o`f)@¼ºzkl½ 
Increase/(Decrease) in Borrowings
 
(4665.00)
 6315.23 

	
vU; ns;rkvksa o çkoèkkuksa esa o`f)@¼ºzkl½ 
Increase/(Decrease) in Other Liabilities & Provisions
 4323.79 
 93.62 

	
mi tksM+ 
Sub Total
(iii)
 (55624.93)
 (4289.40)

**ifjpkyuksa ls fufeZr udnh 
Cash generated from Operations
(i+ii+iii)
 (26064.73)
 
23796.25**

	
çnÙk çR;{k dj ¼çfrns; dks ?kVkdj½ 
Direct Taxes paid (net off Refund)
 
(1874.71)
 (1204.15)

**ifjpkyu dk;Zdykiksa ls fuoy udnh 
Net Cash from Operating Activities
¼,½
(A)
 
(27939.44)
 
22592.10**

**ch-	 fuos'k dk;Zdykiksa ls udnh çokg
B.	
Cash Flow from Investing Activities**

	
vpy vkfLr;ksa dh [kjhn ¼fcØh dks ?kVkdj½ 
Purchase of Fixed Assets (net off Sales)
 
(1143.65)
 
(552.39)

	
lgk;d laLFkkvksa@la;qä m|e@vkjvkjch¼;ksa½ esa fuos'k ¼fuoy½ 
Investment in Subsidiaries/JV/RRBs (net)
 (362.77)
 (180.08)

**fuos'k dk;Zdykiksa esa ç;qä fuoy udnh 
Net Cash used in Investing Activities
¼ch½
(B)
 (1506.42)
 
(732.47)**

**lh-	 foÙkiks"k.k dk;Zdykiksa ls udnh çokg
C.	
Cash flow from Financing Activities**

	
'ks;j iwath@'ks;j vkosnu jkf'k@'ks;j çhfe;e 
Share Capital/Share Application Money/Share Premium
 - 
 - 

	
tkjh@c‚.M ¼fuoy½ dk ¼ekspu½ 
Issue/(Redemption) of Bonds (net)
 
7102.00 
 4461.72 

	
çnÙk ykHkka'k 
Dividend paid
 (715.72)
 (704.71)

	
c‚.M ij çnÙk C;kt  
Interest paid on Bonds 
 
(2970.11)
 (2467.94)

	
vYika'k C;kt esa o`f)@¼ºzkl½ 
Increase/ (Decrease) in Minority Interest
 101.40 
 (14.09)

**foÙkiks"k.k dk;Zdykiksa ls fuoy udnh 
Net Cash from Financing Activities
¼lh½
(C)
 3517.57 
 1274.98**

**Mh-	 udnh rFkk udnh rqY;ksa ls fuoy ifjorZu
D. 	
Net Change in Cash and Cash Equivalents
¼,$ch$lh½
(A+B+C)
 
(25928.29)
 23134.60**

	
vofèk ds vkjaHk esa udnh rFkk udnh rqY; 
Cash and Cash Equivalents at the beginning of the period

	
Hkkjrh; fjt+oZ cSad ds ikl udnh vkSj 'ks"k 
Cash and Balances with Reserve Bank of India
 
78213.52 
 86127.84 

	
cSadksa ds ikl 'ks"k vkSj ekax o vYi lwpuk ij ns; jkf'k 
Balances with Banks & Money at Call & Short Notice
 
79114.96 
 
48066.04 

**157328.48
 134193.88**

----

¼#- djksM+ esa½ (Rs.  in Crore)

**fooj.k**

**Particulars
 31-03-2024 dks lekIr o"kZ 
Year ended 31.03.2024
31-03-2023 dks lekIr o"kZ 
Year ended 31.03.2023**

**vofèk ds lekiu esa udnh rFkk udnh rqY; 
Cash and Cash Equivalents at the end of the period**

	
Hkkjrh; fjt+oZ cSad ds ikl udnh vkSj 'ks"k 
Cash and Balances with Reserve Bank of India
 65325.13 
 78213.52 

	
cSadksa ds ikl 'ks"k vkSj ekax o vYi lwpuk ij ns; jkf'k 
Balances with Banks & Money at Call & Short Notice
 
66075.06 
 79114.96 

 131400.19 
 157328.48 
fVIif.k;k¡ %&
Notes :-		

	
Cash flow statement has been prepared under the Indirect Method and figures have been regrouped wherever considered 
necessary.	

	
Direct taxes paid (net off refund) are treated as arising from operating activities and are not bifurcated between  investing and 
financing activities.	
	
	

	
Figures of previous period have been regrouped wherever considered necessary to conform current period classification.

	
Cash and Cash equivalents includes Cash on hand, Balance with RBI & Other Banks and Money at Call and Short Notice

**çcq) 'kekZ 
Prabudh Sharma
lgk;d egkçcaèkd
Asstt. General Manager**

**eqds'k dqekj
Mukesh Kumar     
lgk;d egkçcaèkd
Asstt. General Manager**

**vkj ds [khph
R K Khichi 
 mi egkçcaèkd 
Deputy General Manager**

**çoh.k dqekj 'kekZ
Praveen Kumar Sharma
egkçcaèkd
General Manager**

**Mh ds tSu
D K Jain
eq[; egkçcaèkd ,oa lh,Qvks
Chief General Manager & CFO**

**fcHkq çlkn egkik=
Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra 
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**,e- ijef'koe 
M Paramasivam  
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**fcuksn dqekj  
Binod Kumar
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**dY;k.k dqekj
Kalyan Kumar
dk;Zikyd funs'kd
Executive Director**

**vrqy dqekj xks;y 
Atul Kumar Goel
çcaèk funs'kd ,oa eq[; dk;Zikyd vf/kdkjh
Managing Director & CEO**

**ds th vuar—".ku
K G Ananthakrishnan
vè;{k
Chairman**

----

MkW- js[kk tSu
Dr. Rekha Jain
funs'kd
Director

latho dqekj fla?ky
Sanjeev Kumar Singhal
funs'kd
Director

iadt tks’kh
Pankaj Joshi
funs'kd
Director

mek ’kadj
Uma Sankar
funs'kd
Director

iadt ’kekZ
Pankaj Sharma
funs'kd
Director

—rs Mh ds NktM+ ,aM daiuh  
For D K Chhajer & Co. 
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 304138bZ
FRN: 304138E     

 —rs ,l lh ckiuk ,aM ,lksfl,V~l  
For S C Bapna & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj 
 Chartered Accountants
 ,Qvkj,u% 115649MCY;w
FRN: 115649W  

—rs mesn tSu ,aM daiuh  
For Ummed Jain & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
 ,Qvkj,u% 119250MCY;w
FRN: 119250W

 lunh ys[kkdkj fnus'k xksfndk
CA Dinesh Godika
Hkkxhnkj 
Partner
¼lnL; la- 072738½
(M.No. 072738)  

—rs ,u ds HkkxZo ,aM daiuh
For N K Bhargava & Co.
lunh ys[kkdkj
Chartered Accountants  
,Qvkj,u% 000429,u 
 FRN:  000429N 

—rs ih ,l Mh ,aM ,lksfl,V~l
 For P S D & Associates
lunh ys[kkdkj 
Chartered Accountants
,Qvkj,u% 004501lh
 FRN: 004501C   

 lunh ys[kkdkj ,u ds HkkxZo  
CA N K Bhargava   
Hkkxhnkj 
Partner
¼lnL; la- 080624½ 
(M.No.080624)      

LFkku% ubZ fnYyh
Place: New Delhi
fnukad% 09 ebZ] 2024	
	

Date: May 09, 2024

----

492

**BLANK PAGE**

----

Shri Atul Kumar Goel, MD & CEO with Executive Directors, Shri Kalyan Kumar, Shri Binod Kumar and Shri M.Paramasivam
launched the UDAAN tools & functionalities at Head Office, Dwarka, New Delhi

Shri Atul Kumar Goel, MD & CEO alongwith Executive Directors Shri Vijay Dube (since retired.), Shri Kalyan Kumar &
Shri M. Paramasivam and other senior officers celebrating Bank’s 129th Foundation day at head office Dwarka, New Delhi.

----

Shri Atul Kumar Goel, MD & CEO, felicitating the chief Guest, Dr.Kiran Bedi, former Lieutenant Governor of Puducherry
and India's ﬁrst Woman IPS officer at Women Conclave held at Head Office Dwarka, New Delhi

Shri Atul Kumar Goel, Managing Director and CEO and Executive Directors, Shri Kalyan Kumar, Shri Binod Kumar,
Shri M.  Paramasivam and Shri Bibhu Prasad Mohapatra and Chief Vigilance Officer Shri Raghavendra Kumar addressed
the staff members on the occasion of New Year 2024

----

Dr.Pramod Sawant, Hon’ble Chief Minister, Goa and Shri Atul kumar Goel ,Managing Director &
Chief Executive officer Inaugurated  BO: Old Goa

Shri Atul Kumar Goel, MD & CEO lighting the lamp at Zonal Heads & Circle Heads Business Conference along with
Executive Directors   Shri Kalyan Kumar, Shri Binod Kumar, Shri M Paramasivam and Shri Bibhu Prasad Mahapatra

----

**वाϏषέक ϋरपोटर्
ANNUAL
REPORT**

**2023-24**

**Head Office: Plot No. 4, Sector 10,
Dwarka, New Delhi - 110075**

**कार ऋण
Car Loan**

**गो͔ ऋण
Gold Loan**

**आवास ऋण
Home Loan**

**पूवर् Ρीकृत ͨवसाय ऋण
Pre approved business loan**

**पीएम Ρύनधी ऋण
PMSVAnidhi**